--- SOURCE: Bhagavata-Subodhini-Canto-7/index.html ---
Bhagavata-Subodhini-Canto-7
PRAISE FOR
BHĀGAVATA SUBODHINĪ
This publication is a precious jewel, both adding to the unlimited radiance of Krishna’s presence
as Srimad-Bhagavatam and reflecting that splendour. What is special: the clarity of both the text
and its graphic presentation, enabling a full and penetrating comprehension of the Bhagavatam’s
structure and profundity.
- HIS HOLINESS DEVAMRITA SWAMI
AUTHOR | MONK | EDUCATOR
I am sincerely grateful to the Bhaktivedanta Vidyapitha for their dedicated efforts to present this
publication – Bhagavata Subodhini. I pray that each reader may enter deeper and deeper into the
knowledge and devotional love (Bhakti Ras) of the essence of all Vedas – Srimad Bhagavatam.
AUTHOR | TEACHER | SPIRITUAL ACTIVIST
Bhagavata Subodhini is a praiseworthy project for deepening our appreciation of the
Bhagavatam, particularly from the insight of Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti. By concisely
organizing his analysis of the work, the devotee will be able to relish both the Bhagavatam and
Visvanatha’s realizations. Caitanya Mahaprabhu has accepted Bhagavatam as the main pramana
since it is the conclusion of all scriptures. By understanding its import the devotee will be able to
grasp the theology, practice and goal of the Vedic tradition in a most compact form.
- HIS HOLINESS BHANU SWAMI
AUTHOR | MONK
pibata bhāgavatam rasamālayam. Bhagavata Subodhini is an excellent study guide that makes
Srimad Bhagavatam more relishable and easier to digest. Drawing strength from the
Bhaktivedanta Purports and Bhagavad commentaries by Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura,
Bhagavata Subodhini is a great tool for an in-depth, systematic and scrutinising study of Srimad
Bhagavatam. I strongly recommend this masterpiece for one and all, young and old, alike. My
hearty congratulations to the Bhaktivedanta Vidyapitha Research Center of Govardhan Eco-
village for this invaluable publication. I pray that they do not stop till the goal of publishing
guides for all the twelve cantos is reached.
- HIS HOLINESS LOKANATHA SWAMI
AUTHOR | MONK | ISKCON PADAYATRA MINISTER
Srila Prabhupada has left for us a treasure house of literature, which is the essence of the Vedas.
To unpack it more into details of what is being said and the congruency of how that knowledge is
being presented is nicely done in this Bhagavata Subodhini. It is a very noble attempt. I find the
Subodhini series a great aid in making our presentation more complete and interesting – both for
the students and the teachers and for general audience who are interested in going deeper into the
philosophy and practice of Krishna Consciousness. Subodhini will help people get attracted to
study Srila Prabhupada’s works, and in a more easily understandable way. It is a great project,
and we commend the devotees who are doing such hard work.
- HIS HOLINESS CHANDRAMAULI SWAMI
AUTHOR | MONK | ISKCON PRISON MINISTER
The Bhagavata Purana is famously considered the ripened fruit of the Vedic tree of knowledge.
If this is true, then the Bhagavata Subodhini – beautifully designed, user-friendly and eminently
accessible – is the most succulent part of this ripened fruit. Each volume of this multivolume set
is visually stunning and easy on the eye, allowing readers to penetrate the Bhagavata in a way
that was not previously possible. Krishnaite kudos to anyone and everyone that had a hand in this
transcendental masterpiece.
- DR. STEVEN J. ROSEN (SATYARAJA DASA)
VAIṢṆAVA SUBJECTS
Given the importance of the Bhagavata Purana and the increase in general interest in its content,
study guides such as the present publication are to be enthusiastically welcomed by students of
the text. The initial two volumes of Bhagavata Subodhini, comprising the first three skandhas of
the Bhagavata, offer a chapter-by-chapter analysis, with a more detailed focus on the most
significant verses. Such volumes will be most useful for classes and workshops.
- PROF. PAUL SHERBOW
RUTGERS UNIVERSITY
I found Bhagavata Subodhini very interesting and useful, for it presents the contents of
Bhagavatam in a systematic and lucid manner. I am very happy that the devotees in our society
are producing such wonderful literature based on Srila Prabhupada’s books and commentaries of
other acharyas. I like the fact that in one book I have access to commentaries of different
acharyas, that too presented in an interesting tabular format, which made it easy and clear to
read. This book is like a Bhagavatam digest. It helps preachers in their presentations on
Bhagavatam. I wish I had access to such books before. I encourage devotees to come together,
for this kind of study and contemplation on the Bhagavatam.
AUTHOR | MONK
It is a guide, I use to get a bird’s eye view of a chapter, to spot out diamond like sections for
deeper contemplation and nectar like slokas for relishing and repeating to others. It has increased
my appetite for Bhāgavatam study and gain great spiritual advantage. Thanks to Bhaktivedanta
Vidyapitha Research Center for the dedicated efforts in making Srila Prabhupada’s masterpiece
work easy and accessible for all.
- RADHESHYAM DAS
AUTHOR | MONK | PRESIDENT OF ISKCON PUNE
With eighteen thousand verses, the Srimad Bhagavatam is a vast treasure house of philosophy,
pastimes, and poetic beauty. It can be challenging even for learned readers to grasp the structure
and content of this spotless Purana. Gauranga Darshan Prabhu has done an immense service to
the Vaishnava community by making the Bhagavatam easy to understand (subodhini) by
summarizing the contents of each chapter, showing the interconnections between different
sections, and highlighting key verses. I thank Gauranga Darshan Prabhu and the Bhakivedanta
Vidyapitha Research Center for this wonderful gift.
- DR. RAVI M. GUPTA (RADHIKA RAMANA DASA)
The challenge for teachers in today’s distracting world is to catch and retain students’ attention.
Students, even if they can avoid distractions, still can easily be overawed by the vastness and
seeming complexity of shastra. In such a setting, the Subodhini series comes to the aid of shastra
teachers and shastra students by presenting the foremost texts of our tradition accessibly and
appealingly. As our movement strives to create more resources for promoting education, the
Subodhini series prepared by Gauranga Darshan Prabhu counts among the most valuable
resources available for devotees in their efforts to savor and share the treasure of shastra that
Srila Prabhupada has gifted us.
- CHAITANYA CHARAN DAS
HIS DIVINE GRACE AUTHOR | MENTOR | SPIRITUAL TEACHER
The Subodhini series by Gauranga Darshan Prabhu makes the Bhagavad Gita, Srimad
Bhagavatam and Caitanya Caritamrita so accessible to those that want to dive deep into these
scriptures. Breaking everything into small sections makes it so much easier to taste spoonfuls of
nectar from the ocean of HDG A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Srila Prabhupada’s purport
presentations.
- SHUBHA VILAS DAS
Bhaktivedanta Vidyapitha Research Center
ISKCON Govardhan Eco Village, Galtare, Hamrapur (P.O),
Wada (Taluka), Palghar (District),
Maharashtra, India - 421303
www.vidyapitha.in | www.brcmumbai.com
Published and Printed by:
Tulsi Books (A division of Sri Tulsi Trust)
7. K. M. Munshi marg, Girgaum Chowpatty, Mumbai – 400007
www.tulsibooks.com | Email: tulsibookssales@gmail.com
© 2019, Sri Tulsi Trust
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system or transmitted in any form, or by
any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise) without the prior written permission of Sri Tulsi Trust.
BHĀGAVATA SUBODHINĪ CANTO 7
ISBN: 978-93-81283-64-6
First Printing – April 2019: 2000 Copies
Second Printing – April 2021: 2000 Copies
Dedicated to
HIS DIVINE GRACE
A. C. BHAKTIVEDANTA SWAMI PRABHUPĀDA
Founder-Ācārya of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness
yair īdṛśī bhagavato gatir ātma-vāda
ekāntato nigamibhiḥ pratipāditā nah
tuṣyantv adabhra-karuṇāḥ sva-kṛtena nitym
ko nāma tat pratikaroti vinoda-pātram
How can such persons, who have rendered unlimited service by explaining the path of self-realization in relation to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and whose explanations are given for our enlightenment with complete conviction and Vedic evidence,
be repaid except by folded palms containing water for their satisfaction? Such great personalities can be satisfied only by their
own activities, which are distributed amongst human society out of their unlimited mercy.
[Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 4.22.47]
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Words fall short in expressing my gratitude to Śrīla Prabhupāda who presented the Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam with his lucid explanations in a language understood by the modern world. I am
indebted to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravarti Ṭhākura for his Sārārthadarśinī commentary that further
helped me understand the contents and flow of the Bhāgavatam. My sincere thanks to His
Holiness Bhanu Swami Maharaja for presenting it in English. Bhāgavata Subodhinī is nothing
but a concise representation of the Bhāgavatam based on the explanations of these great ācāryas.
I express my earnest gratitude to my beloved guru His Holiness Radhanath Swami Maharaja for
enlightening me on the ideal mood of scriptural study and encouraging me with his kind
blessings. I also thank him for envisioning the Govardhan Ecovillage project that offers a perfect
ambience and facility for śāstric study.
I am indebted to Gauranga Prabhu, my guide and source of inspiration in my humble
endeavours. It is his ardent desire to see the scriptures being systematically studied by the
devotees, and it is my fortune to be of some assistance in this endeavour.
I am grateful to Sakha Gadadhar Prabhu for drawing all the illustrations of Nṛsiṁhadeva and
Prahlāda in this book. I thank Vikas Prabhu, Vijay Krishna Kumar Prabhu and Uddhava Priya
Prabhu for their kind assistance in compiling the Appendices. My sincere thanks to Dr. Shrilekha
Hada for her wonderful inputs in improvising the manuscript. Special thanks to Vrindavan Priya
Prabhu for providing the image of his Śrī Śrī Lakṣmī-Nṛsiṁha Deity for the cover page. I am
thankful to the Tulsi books team for publishing the book. It is not possible to name all my friends
at Govardhan Ecovillage whose warmth and support inspire me in all my services.
– Gauranga Darshan Das
CONTENTS
Introduction
The Flow of the Seventh Canto
Seventh Canto At a Glance
7.1 The Supreme Lord Is Equal to Everyone
7.2 Hiraṇyakaśipu, King of the Demons
7.3 Hiraṇyakaśipu’s Plan to Become Immortal
7.4 Hiraṇyakaśipu Terrorizes The Universe
7.5 Prahlāda Mahārāja the Saintly Son of Hiraṇyakaśipu
7.6 Prahlāda Instructs His Demoniac Schoolmates
7.7 What Prahlāda Learned in the Womb
7.8 Lord Nṛsiṁha-deva Slays the King of Demons
7.9 Prahlāda Pacifies Lord Nṛsiṁha-deva with Prayers
7.10 Prahlāda, The Best Among Exalted Devotees
7.11 The Perfect Society: Four Social Classes
7.12 The Perfect Society: Four Spiritual Classes
7.13 The Behavior of a Perfect Person
7.14 Ideal Family Life
7.15 Instructions for Civilized Human Beings
Special Verses
1. Vaiṣṇava Compassion
2. The Basis of Caste
3. Nine Processes of Bhakti
Thematic Compilations
1. Glories of Bhakti-yoga
2. The Fallacy of Material Life
3. The Glories of a Guru
4. Prayers: A Supplication for Grace
5. The Dynamics of Lust
Appendix
1. Character Portrayals
2. Kṛṣṇa’s Names
3. Analogies
INTRODUCTION
In the rainy season, muddy village paths are often not used, and thus they get covered with grass.
Similarly, when authentic scriptures are not studied and followed for long, the pure knowledge
that they contain gets covered by speculative and unwanted theories that misdirect human
society.
Vedic scriptures present pristine wisdom descending directly from the Supreme Lord. They show
us the path of transcending miseries and going back to Godhead. When thick grass covers a
pathway, it becomes difficult to traverse or sometimes the path is not even recognized. Similarly,
if one generation chooses not to study, apply and spread the knowledge of these scriptures, then
later generations will also lose interest in them.
Therefore, sincere spiritual seekers must endeavour to read and assimilate scriptural principles,
to guide the future generations. This Bhāgavata Subodhinī is a humble attempt to facilitate and
simplify the study of the most vital scripture, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, by giving its structure and
flow in a concise form.
The Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the ripened fruit of the desire tree of the Vedic scriptures. This
transcendental literature is nondifferent from Lord Kṛṣṇa, who has returned in the form of this
book (śrī-kṛṣṇa parivartitā) to shed light on the misdirected civilization of Kali-yuga. It was
compiled by the literary incarnation of Godhead, Śrīla Vyāsadeva in the maturity of his
knowledge. The study of Bhāgavatam, done in line with the explanations of bona fide ācāryas in
the Vaiṣṇava paramparā, gives the sincere reader an unparalleled understanding of the Absolute
Truth, which is not possible by one’s own speculative efforts. In fact, it is Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself
who speaks through the disciplic succession to enlighten the serious students of the Bhāgavatam.
The Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is a most extraordinary scripture. It presents very rare and confidential
insights about the identity, nature and character of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, along with His incarnations and wonderful devotees.
The Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam proceeds in twelve volumes or cantos that are depicted as the limbs of
Lord Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental body as follows:
pādau yadīyau prathama-dvitīyau tṛtīya-tūryau kathitau yad-ūrū
nābhis tathā pañcama eva ṣaṣtho bhujāntaraṁ dor-yugalaṁ tathānyau
kaṇṭhas tu rājan navamo yadīyo mukhāravindaṁ daśamaḥ praphullam
ekādaśo yasya lalāṭa-paṭṭaṁ śiro’pi tu dvādaśa eva bhāti
tam ādidevaṁ karuṇā-nidhānaṁ tamāla-varṇaṁ suhitāvatāram
apāra-saṁsāra-samudra-setuṁ bhajāmahe bhāgavata-svarūpam
“The First and Second Cantos of the Bhāgavatam are Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet. The Third and Fourth Cantos are His
Ninth Canto is His throat. The Tenth Canto is His beautiful lotus-face. The Eleventh Canto is His forehead. The
Twelfth Canto is His head. I bow down to that Lord, the ocean of mercy whose colour is like that of a tamāla tree and
who appears in this world for the welfare of all. I worship Him as the bridge for crossing the unfathomable ocean of
material existence. The Bhāgavatam has appeared as His very Self.” [Padma Purāṇa]
The expanse and depth of the Bhāgavatam is better appreciated from the commentaries of great
ācāryas, or spiritual teachers. Śrīla Prabhupāda mentions in his purport to the first verse of the
Bhāgavatam: “…there is no doubt about the authority of the Bhāgavatam. Within the past five
hundred years, many erudite scholars and ācāryas like Jīva Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī,
Viśvanātha Cakravartī, Vallabhācārya, and many other distinguished scholars even after the time
of Lord Caitanya made elaborate commentaries on the Bhāgavatam. And the serious student
would do well to attempt to go through them to better relish the transcendental messages.”
Śrīla Prabhupāda compared Bhāgavatam study to taking darśana of the deity of Lord Kṛṣṇa,
which is done in progression from His lotus feet to the lotus face. He emphasizes a step-by-step
study of the Bhāgavatam in his preface to the Bhāgavatam: “The only qualification one needs to
study this great book of transcendental knowledge is to proceed step by step cautiously and not
jump forward haphazardly as with an ordinary book. It should be gone through chapter by
chapter, one after another.”
While reading this voluminous scripture of eighteen thousand verses, readers may find
themselves lost in the multitudes of dialogues and episodes, or in the technical language and
philosophy of the Bhāgavatam. Therefore, in the Bhāgavata Subodhinī, I have made a humble
attempt to present the flow of the Bhāgavatam concisely, based on the commentaries of Śrīla
Prabhupāda and Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura.
This book aims at presenting the structure of the Bhāgavatam, with its chapters, verses and
connections, in simplified flow charts and tables. This book is not meant to be a replacement for
a detailed study of the Bhāgavatam itself, but a complement for devotees, students and curious
readers. I hope that this bird’s eye view of the Bhāgavatam helps the readers to deepen their
study of the Bhāgavatam and fully delight in its splendour.
Bhāgavata Subodhinī simplifies the apparent complexity in understanding the
Bhāgavatam, by uncovering and integrating the explanations of Śrīla Prabhupāda and
the previous ācāryas, thus catering for the taste and needs of avid readers, scholars and
even newcomers to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.
Features of Bhāgavata Subodhinī
Canto at a glance: Overview of the entire canto, presented in a flowchart.
Chapter overview chart: Provides a bird’s eye view of the major sections and subsections of a
chapter in a block diagram.
Section: A group of verses that fall under the same heading.
Subsection: A sub-group of verses within a section.
Verse synopsis: A brief summary of a verse highlighting its import as explained by the ācāryas
All the verses are duly numbered and some keywords of the Sanskrit verse are given in brackets.
Verse: A most vital Sanskrit verse of the chapter, which is worth memorizing, presented in the
flow, sometimes with its line-by-line meaning in a tabular form.
Table: A list of items under a section.
Flow chart: Gives a bird’s eye view of the sequence of stages in a process.
Link: The connection between two verses, sections, subsections or chapters
Note: A vital comment or a brief explanation on a verse or section, mainly related to the flow
of the chapter, for enhancing the understanding.
Footnote: Deeper insights, additional information and application perspectives.
‘+’ indicates marriage ties (Ex: Husband + Wife)
‘→’ indicates connection between generations (Ex: Father → Son)
All the links, notes and footnotes are based on the commentaries of Śrīla Prabhupāda and Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravarti Ṭhākūra.
Thematic compilations section presents lists of verses on various prominent themes of the
Bhāgavatam Canto, duly categorized. The objective of this section is to make the reader
appreciate the cross-sectional prominence of a specific theme revealed in various chapters of the
canto.
Appendix presents extensive lists of reference material from the Bhāgavatam. Unlike thematic
compilations, they are more direct in nature with little or no analysis, such as, names of the
Supreme Lord, character portrayals and analogies.
Nomenclature: To keep the reading of Bhāgavata Subodhinī relatively simple, the referencing
for verses is done in a standard format. The following abbreviations represent their equivalent
expanded forms given against them:
SB – Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
BG – Bhagavad-gīta
CC – Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta
7.2.6 – SB Canto Seven, Chapter Two, Verse Six
7.2.6 P – Śrīla Prabhupāda’s purport on 7.2.6
7.2.6 V – Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākūra’s commentary on 7.2.6
References to other books are explicitly stated.
With all the above features, the Bhāgavata Subodhinī aims to enrich the experience of your
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam study. I sincerely hope and pray that this book is of some assistance in the
study and revision of the sincere readers of the Bhāgavatam, translated and commented by Śrīla
Prabhupāda and the other ācāryas. I seek forgiveness for any unintended discrepancies in this
work. I invite you to delve deep in the glorious teachings of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and experience
its enlivening effect.
Note: This section gives a very brief outline of the first six cantos of the Bhāgavatam and a
more detailed overview of the Seventh Canto. For the detailed overviews of the first six
cantos, please refer to the previous four volumes of Bhāgavata Subodhinī.
Srimad-Bhāgavatam is the ripened fruit of the tree of Vedic wisdom compiled by Śrīla
Vyāsadeva at the maturity of his knowledge. It is the granthāvatāra of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, narrating
the pastimes of His various avatāras. Glorified as a mahā-purāṇa, it contains ten subjects
namely: (1) Sarga: universal creation by the Supreme Lord, (2) Visarga: secondary creation by
Lord Brahmā, (3) sthānaṁ: planetary systems, (4) poṣaṇam: protection by the Lord, (5) ūti:
impetus, (6) manvantara: the reign of Manus, (7) īśānukatha: the topics of God and His
devotees, (8) nirodha: annihilation, (9) mukti: liberation, and (10) āśraya: the supreme shelter,
Lord Kṛṣṇa. The ultimate purpose of the first nine topics is to glorify the tenth topic, āśraya-
tattva. Although all these topics are spread in all the cantos of the Bhāgavatam, they are more
vividly described in the specific cantos.
The First and the Second Cantos of the Bhāgavatam are considered the Supreme Lord’s lotus
feet and they form a perfect prelude to the rest of the Bhāgavatam by introducing the reader to its
key philosophical concepts and prominent characters. These cantos also establish bhakti-yoga as
the topmost spiritual path and Lord Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Wonderful
prayers by devotees like Kunti and Bhīṣma, and Lord Kṛṣṇa’s reciprocation with them, the birth
of Parīkṣit Mahārāja and his activities, and the history of Bhāgavatam are presented. Further,
there are descriptions of the process of creation, virāṭ-rūpa, catuḥ-ślokī Bhāgavatam and finally
the definitions of the ten topics of the Bhāgavatam.
The Third and the Fourth Cantos correspond to the Supreme Lord’s thighs and predominantly
describe the topics of sarga and visarga, through the conversation of Vidura and Maitreya. The
Third Canto also describes time, embryology, family life, Sāṅkhya, bhakti-yoga, aṣṭāṅga-yoga,
jñāna-yoga, karma, the spiritual and the material worlds. We further read the pastimes of Lord
Varāha, the description of Vaikuṇṭhaloka, the household life of Kardama Muni and Devahūti,
and the teachings of Lord Kapila in the Third Canto. The Fourth Canto is very rich in its content.
It unveils the stories of admired personalities like Lord Śiva, Sunīti, Dhruva, Nārada, Aṅga,
Pṛthu and the Pracetās, who all showed extraordinary examples of bhakti. One can also learn
about the unfavourable attitudes in bhakti from the mistakes of characters like Dakṣa, Suruci,
Vena, Indra and Prācīnabarhi. The positive transformation undergone by many of these
personalities, mainly due the intervention of devotees, adds to the glory of bhakti. Furthermore,
the prayers of pure devotees like Dhruva, Pṛthu and the Pracetās disclose the foremost aspiration
of a devotee – to hear kṛṣṇa-kathā in the association of devotees.
The Fifth Canto corresponds to the lotus navel of the Supreme Lord. In this canto, Śukadeva
Gosvāmī continues the topic of visarga and describes the dynasty of Priyavrata, the other son of
Manu. Priyavrata’s dynasty consists of several notable personalities like Āgnīdhra, Nābhi, Lord
Ṛṣabhadeva and Bharata in his three lives as a King, a deer and a brāhmaṇa.1 All these episodes
culminate in the glory of bhakti. The latter half of this canto discusses sthānam, the positioning
of various planetary systems within the structure of the universe for the inhabitation of various
living entities. The canto concludes with a description of various hellish planets.
The Sixth Canto of the Bhāgavatam corresponds to the chest of the Supreme Lord. It is majorly
centered on the theme of poṣaṇam, or protection offered by the Supreme Lord to His devotees,
although they sometimes transgress the laws of dharma. This canto begins with the glorification
of the Lord’s holy names through the episode of Ajāmila. Later Śukadeva Gosvāmī resumes the
topic of visarga and describes the living entities generated through the sixty daughters of Dakṣa.
As a part of that, the offenses and the struggles of Indra are described along with the glories of a
pure devotee Vṛtrāsura. Vṛtrāsura’s previous life as King Citraketu reveals the insubstantial
nature of material relationships, compassion of a devotee in uplifting a struggling soul, the need
to be careful in dealing with other devotees, and the eagerness of the Supreme Lord to reclaim
His devotee. The canto concludes with the transformation of Diti and Indra by devotional
service.
Thus the first six cantos of the Bhāgavatam describe the glories of the Supreme Lord and His
devotees and predominantly describe sarga, visarga, sthānam and poṣaṇam.
Ūti – The inclination to act
The Seventh Canto and the Eighth Canto of the Bhāgavatam represent the arms of the Supreme
Lord. The Seventh Canto describes ūti or inclination, which is of two types – auspicious and
inauspicious. The auspicious and inauspicious inclinations of the jīvas lead them to perform
pious and impious acts, which becomes the cause of their future happiness and distress in various
births. The inauspicious inclinations of Hiraṇyakaśipu were caused by the anger of the four
Kumāras (who cursed Jaya and Vijaya to go to the material world). The auspicious inclination
for pure bhakti of Prahlāda arose from the mercy of Nārada Muni (who enlightened Prahlāda
when he was in his mother’s womb).
The Seventh Canto describes two types of bhakti: (i) śuddha-bhakti or pure devotional service of
Prahlāda described in the first ten chapters, and (ii) miśra-bhakti or mixed devotional service of
persons following varṇāśṛama described in the last five chapters. In miśra-bhakti, bhakti is
mixed with karma or jñāna as a major or minor element.
God’s apparent partiality
At the end of the Sixth Canto, Śukadeva Gosvāmī described that Diti lamented for the death of
her sons Hiraṇyākṣa and Hiraṇyakaśipu, who were killed by Lord Viṣṇu in the form of
Varāhadeva and Nṛsiṁhadeva, being instigated by Indra (SB 6.18.23). Referring to this, Parīkṣit
Mahārāja asked Śukadeva Gosvāmī about the apparent partiality of Lord Viṣṇu in favouring the
devatās and killing the demons. Śukadeva Gosvāmī replied that the devatās flourish when sattva-
guṇa is prominent and the demons flourish when rajo- and tamo- guṇas are prominent, due to
the influence of time. But the Supreme Lord is neutral, impartial and equal to everyone. He is
especially inclined to His devotees in reciprocation to their devotion. However, even when He
punishes and kills the demons, He only benefits them by giving them liberation. Thus, the Lord’s
mercy and His punishment are ultimately meant to uplift everyone. (7.1)
God’s astonishing mercy
In this connection, Śukadeva Gosvāmī refers to a conversation between Nārada Muni and King
Yudhiṣṭira that took place at the Rājasūya sacrifice (the entire Seventh Canto is based on this
conversation). At that time, Lord Kṛṣṇa beheaded Śiśupāla and thus liberated him. Wondering at
this, Yudhiṣṭira asked Nārada how could Śiśupāla who was always envious and offensive
towards Kṛṣṇa attain liberation. Nārada explained that when one’s envy or anger towards Kṛṣṇa
leads to a deep absorption in Him, one attains Kṛṣṇa. Then he related how the doorkeepers of
Vaikuṇṭha, Jaya and Vijaya, were cursed by the Kumāras, and took three births in this world as:
Hiraṇyākṣa and Hiraṇyakaśipu, Rāvaṇa and Kumbhakarṇa, Śiśupāla and Dantavakra. (7.1)
Lamentation and pacification
Hiraṇyakaśipu, the king of the demons, was grief-stricken when his brother Hiraṇyākṣa was
killed by Lord Varāha. He intended to kill Lord Viṣṇu and instructed his demoniac associates to
persecute innocent people, stop all religious activities and the worship of Viṣṇu. He performed
the last rites of Hiraṇyākṣa and pacified his relatives by saying that the material body is
perishable and the spirit soul is eternal. Even demons speak philosophy, but they don’t intend to
act on it. Hiraṇyakaśipu narrated the story of king Suyajña who died in a battle. Suyajña’s wives
lamented and didn’t allow the dead body to be burnt. At that time Yamarāja came as a small boy
and enlightened them by narrating the story of Kuliṅga birds. (7.2)
An intelligent attempt to avoid death!
Desiring to become immortal, Hiraṇyakaśipu later performed severe austerities to please Lord
Brahmā. The effect of his austerities tormented the devatās, who then reported to Brahmā about
Hiraṇyakaśipu’s intentions to occupy Brahmā’s position, and appealed him to take suitable
action. Obliged, Brahmā went to Hiraṇyakaśipu who became emaciated by penance. Brahmā
appreciated his determination, revived him and asked what he wanted. Hiraṇyakaśipu praised
Brahmā in various ways and begged that he may not meet death – from any living entity created
by him, inside or outside a house, during day or night, on the ground or in the sky, by any
weapon, human, animal, devatā, snakes and so on. However intelligent one may be to avoid
death, he can’t be smarter than the Supreme Lord. (7.3)
A classic example of misusing power
Lord Brahmā granted the rare benedictions asked by Hiraṇyakaśipu. Demons control their senses
with great determination to receive boons, but by the power of those very boons, they become
victims of their uncontrolled senses. Envious Hiraṇyakaśipu conquered all directions, oppressed
the devatās, usurped sacrificial shares, controlled the nature, made everyone forcefully worship
him and always remained intoxicated internally and externally. The devatās approached Lord
Viṣṇu for protection and the Lord reassured them that Hiraṇyakaśipu would be vanquished when
he teases his noble son Prahlāda, endowed will all transcendental qualities. (7.4)
The faith and wisdom of a young devotee
Little Prahlāda was sent for education to the school of Śaṇḍa and Amarka, the sons of
Śukrācārya. Prahlāda didn’t like the political philosophy taught by his teachers. Once
Hiraṇyakaśipu affectionately asked Prahlāda to speak on what he considered the best of all
subjects. Prahlāda replied that for an attached householder, giving up family life and taking
shelter of Lord Hari is the best. Hiraṇyakaśipu laughed at it and told Prahlāda’s teachers to
protect him from the Vaiṣṇavas who might go to guru-kula in disguise. Śaṇḍa and Amarka took
Prahlāda back to guru-kula, chastised him and forcefully taught him dharma, artha and kāma,
and brought him to his father again. Hiraṇyakaśipu asked Prahlāda to repeat what he had learnt
from his guru. Prahlāda described the nine processes of bhakti. Hiraṇyakaśipu became furious
and asked the boy who taught him that knowledge. Prahlāda described the nature and destination
of attached householders, and the power of serving a Vaiṣṇava. Enraged, Hiraṇyakaśipu ordered
his servants to kill Prahlāda. But all the attempts to kill Prahlāda failed. It was Lord Viṣṇu’s
responsibility to protect His faithful devotee in all calamities. Finally Prahlāda was sent to school
again at the advice of Śaṇḍa and Amarka. (7.5)
Divine teachings in a demons’ arena
At guru-kula, when Prahlāda’s classmates called him to play in the absence of their teachers,
Prahlāda spoke to them in sweet words about the futility of material life. One shouldn’t waste the
valuable human life for sense gratification to get entangled in materialistic family affairs. A
human being should perfect one’s life by worshiping the infallible Supreme Lord Nārāyaṇa with
bhakti. Nothing is unobtainable when the Lord is satisfied. (7.6)
The ceaseless flow of bhakti
Prahlāda’s friends asked him how he was so enlightened. Prahlāda narrated that when his father
Hiraṇyakaśipu went to do austerities, the devatās attacked the demons and arrested his mother
Kayādhu. Then Nārada Muni arrived and stopped them saying that the child in her womb was a
great devotee. So the devatās offered respects to her and departed. Merciful Nārada Muni
brought Kayādhu to his āśrama and spoke to her and the child in her womb on great
transcendental topics. But she forgot them, and Prahlāda remembered them. Even a child in the
mother’s womb can know about bhakti by the power of a pure Vaiṣṇava. (7.7)
Prahlāda continued to teach his classmates. He described to them the qualities of the eternal spirit
soul and that pure soul gets entangled due to material intelligence. Bhakti is the best path that
disentangles the jīva from this material existence. It begins with service to a bona fide guru, frees
one from lust, greed, illusion and so on, and brings one to the platform of loving devotion unto
Lord Vāsudeva. It is in one’s best interest to stop struggling for material pleasures, and take to
devotional service of Lord Viṣṇu. Thus Prahlāda urged his classmates to take to Viṣṇu-bhakti.
(7.7)
The final confrontation
Prahlāda’s schoolmates loved his teachings on bhakti and rejected the instructions of Śaṇḍa and
Amarka, who then reported about this to Hiraṇyakaśipu. Hiraṇyakaśipu rebuked Prahlāda and
asked him by whose power was he so fearless. Prahlāda said that Viṣṇu is the source of
everyone’s strength including Hiraṇyakśipu’s. Prahlāda advised his father to give up his
demoniac mentality and relinquish the real enemies seated within his own heart like lust, pride
and so on. Hiraṇyakśipu threatened to kill Prahlāda and challenged him if his God were present
in a pillar. Convinced about the all-pervading nature of the Supreme Lord, Prahlāda said, “Yes!”
(7.8)
The most spectacular darśana ever
Hiraṇyakaśipu struck the pillar in rage. To prove the words of His devotee(s) true, the Supreme
Lord appeared from the pillar in an unprecedented form as Nṛsiṁha-deva, half-man and half-
lion. After enjoying fighting pastimes for some time, Lord Nṛsiṁha placed Hiraṇyakaśipu on his
lap and killed him at the time of sunset, on the doorway, merely with His nails, thus not violating
any of the benedictions of Brahmā. The devatās celebrated the Lord’s victory and offered Him
various prayers. (7.8)
The prayers that pacified God
Lord Nṛsiṁha-deva who sat on Hiraṇyakaśipu’s throne, was not pacified with the prayers of the
demiogds. Even Lakṣmī-devī was fearful of approaching Him. Then Lord Brahmā requested
Prahlāda to pacify Nṛsiṁha-deva. Prahlāda fell at the feet of the Lord, who then affectionately
placed His lotus hand on the boy’s head. Prahlāda offered heartfelt prayers that showed his deep
humility, devotion, eagerness for shelter, fear of conditioned life, compassion for the fallen souls
and his knowledge of the Godhead’s unlimited opulence and glories. In his various prayers,
Prahlāda indirectly indicated and directly declared that bhakti is the ultimate refuge, and that the
material opulences are futile. Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva became very much pleased and told Prahlāda to
ask for any benediction he wanted. (7.9)
Unmotivated servant and Merciful master
Prahlāda told Nṛsiṁha-deva not to tempt him with boons, and that he wasn’t a merchant to trade
his devotional service for some material benefit. But if at all the Lord wanted to give him some
benediction, he desired not to have any material desires. Yet Lord Nṛsiṁha-deva told Prahlāda to
enjoy as the king of demons till the end of the manvantara. Prahlāda then requested the Lord to
excuse his father, and the Lord said that Hiraṇyakaśipu has been purified along with twenty-one
forefathers. Later Lord Nṛsiṁha-deva told Brahmā not to give such benedictions to demons
again. (7.10)
Nārada Muni thus concluded his narration about the mahā-bhāgavata devotee Prahlāda Mahārāja
and the Supreme Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva. Even Brahmā and Śiva cannot understand and describe the
Supreme Lord’s glories. Nārada then described how Śiva derived his power from Lord Kṛṣṇa to
kill the demon Tripura. (7.10)
The four varṇas (social classes)
Yudhiṣṭira Mahārāja then asked Nārada Muni to describe two more topics: Sanātanadharma and
varṇāśrama-dharma. Nārada Muni first explained that sanātana-dharma or the eternal religion
of every living entity is to satisfy Lord Hari by performing bhakti. He then described thirty
qualifications like humility, mercy and nonviolence, by which one can satisfy the Lord. Nārada
Muni then described the occupational duties and characteristics of the four varṇas namely
brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas and śūdras. He also described the duties of a chaste wife and
mixed classes. (7.11)
The four āśramas (spiritual classes)
A brahmacārī student should live in guru-kula and serve the guru with submissiveness and sense
control, and shouldn’t associate with women. (7.12)
A vānaprastha should live a simple life in the forest eating only fruits, and give up his life by
merging his gross and subtle bodies with the respective material elements. (7.12)
A sannyāsī should be detached, independent, peaceful and fully surrendered to Lord Nārāyaṇa.
Nārada Muni further described the conduct of a sannyāsī by quoting a conversation between
Prahlāda Mahārāja and an avadhūta brāhmaṇa, who described the futility of material happiness
and the joy of renunciation. (7.13)
A gṛhastha should offer the results of one’s work to Kṛṣṇa and be detached, devoted, neutral,
simple, responsible, and maintain others as well. They should follow suitable time and place to
perform all religious activities, and worship the deities, brāhmaṇas and Lord Acyuta. One should
offer charity to qualified brāhmaṇas and give up violence towards other living entities. One
should avoid the five types of irreligion and cultivate satisfaction. By surrendering to a bona fide
guru, and following the prescribed methods, one can overcome all anarthas. Householders get
liberated by giving up family life at the right time, practicing yoga and thus perfecting the human
life. (7.14-15)
Nārada Muni then describes the body-chariot metaphor, and the paths of pravṛtti and nivṛtti,
gives a summary and concludes with a description of his previous life as a Gandharva named
Upabarhaṇa. Finally he glorifies the pure devotion of the Pāṇḍavas. (7.15)
1 In the Third, Fourth and Fifth Cantos, Maitreya describes the family lines of Svāyambhuva Manu’s descendants: Devahūti
(3.21-4.1), Ākūti (4.1), Prasūti (4.1-7), Uttānapāda (4.8-4.31) and Priyavrata (5.1-15).
SEVENTH CANTO AT A GLANCE
7.1 THE SUPREME LORD IS EQUAL TO EVERYONE
Link from Canto 6 to Canto 7: In 6.18.23, it was mentioned that Diti burned with anger and
lamentation when her two sons Hiraṇyākṣa and Hiraṇyakaśipu were killed by Lord Viṣṇu, being
instigated by Indra. This apparantly indicates that the Supreme Lord is partial to the devatās and
inimical towards the demons. Parīkṣit Mahārāja, as if not tolerating the partiality of Viṣṇu in
favoring Indra, inquired from Śukadeva Gosvāmī about this. Actually Parīkṣit understands the
truth, but he desired to relish the nectar of the conclusion from the mouth of Śukadeva Gosvāmī.
Therefore he asks this question in 7.1.1-3.
1-3: MAHĀRĀJA PARĪKṢIT INQUIRES ABOUT THE LORD’S APPARENT PARTIALITY
1. Equal, yet partial!? – The Supreme Lord (bhagavān) Viṣṇu is equal (samaḥ), dear (priyaḥ)
and a friend (suhṛd) to everyone. How then did He kill the demons to favour Indra, as if He were
partial (viṣamo yathā)?
Here Parīkṣit asks Śukadeva, “If the Lord is equal (sama), how can he show partiality to
the devatās? If he is affectionate (priya) and friend (suhṛt) to all beings, why is He not
affectionate and friendly to the demons?”
2. Why can’t the Lord be partial?
The Lord doesn’t derive happiness from devatās or distress from demons. So, why should
He be paritial?
3. Kindly dispel my great doubt (saṁśayaḥ) about the qualities (favouritism and ill-will) of
Lord Nārāyaṇa (nārāyaṇa-guṇān) with positive evidence, O greatly fortunate sage (sumahā-
bhāga).
Now Śukadeva Gosvāmī glorifies the wonderful question of Parīkṣit Mahārāja and answers it
philosophically.
4-12: ŚUKADEVA GOSVĀMĪ GIVES A PHILOSOPHICAL ANSWER
4-5. Question about bhagavān, bhāgavata and bhakti
sādhu pṛṣṭaṁ mahārāja   O great king, this is an excellent inquiry, because –
hareś caritam adbhutam   (i) It is about he wonderful activities of Lord Hari
yad bhāgavata-māhātmyaṁ   (ii) It reveals the glories of the devotees (Prahlāda)
bhagavad-bhakti-vardhanam  (iii) It increases devotion to the Supreme Lord
gīyate paramaṁ puṇyam    It is sung by the foremost and pious
ṛṣibhir nāradādibhiḥ  sages headed by Nārada Muni.
natvā kṛṣṇāya munaye   Offering obeisances to sage Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana Vyāsa,
kathayiṣye hareḥ kathām  I shall narrate the topics of Lord Hari.
6. The Supreme Lord (bhagavān) Viṣṇu is – without material qualities (nirguṇa), unborn (aja),
unmanifest (avyakta) and transcendental to material nature (prakṛteḥ paraḥ). Yet, by His own
spiritual potency, He enters into matter and appears to act like a human being and cause cause
subordination or prominence of a guna.
7. The three guṇas (modes), sattva (goodness), rajas (passion) and tamas (ignorance)
belong to prakṛti, material nature or this material world
do not influence the Supreme Lord
do not increase or decrease simultaneously
The material nature and the modes are under the control of the Lord. He is not influenced
by the modes as described in the above two verses, so He cannot be partial.
The inequality of the Lord seen everywhere is based on the inequality of the guṇas, according
to their increase or diminution. The various modes do not work all at once. One mode becomes
more prominent by oppressing the other modes, and becomes less prominent by being oppressed
by the other modes.
8. Prominence of the modes: Different people flourish in different modes, favoured by the Lord
who fosters results according to particular time (kālānuguṇo).
When sattva-guṇa is prominent, the devatās and sages flourish
When rajo-guṇa is prominent, the demons flourish
When tamo-guṇa is prominent, the Yakṣas and Rākṣasas flourish
The cause of the increase of a guṇa is time. Since the guṇas themselves are insentient,
they cannot increase or decrease by themselves. The Lord must enter as their controller.
9. The Lord favors different jīvas residing in them like fire in wood, water in cup and ether in
pot. An expert thinker can perceive how much the Lord favors a person by seeing his actions.
Timely favouring is not favoritism: With the increase or decrease of a guṇa, the people
influenced by that guṇa flourish or don’t flourish. Fire is latent in wood. When there is
more wood there is more fire and when there is less wood there is less fire. One does not
call this inequality. Similarly, when there is more sattva, devatās flourish. At that time, as
rajas decreases the demons do not flourish. From the common viewpoint this may seem
like favoritism but it is not, for when sattva is not prominent, the devatās do not flourish.
10. When the Lord desires to create bodies for different jīvas, He revives the three modes. As
the Supersoul, He enters each body, and conducts creation using rajo-guṇa, maintenance using
sattva-guṇa and annihilation using tamo-guṇa.
11. The Lord creates time factor to control the creation but He is not under time. The material
energy (prakṛti) and the jīva act within the limits of time.
12. When time enhances sattva-guṇa, induced by the Lord, the Lord favors the devatās (sura-
priya), who are in sattva, and destroys the demons inimical to them, who are covered by rajas
and tamas. But the Lord’s activities are not partial.
The Lord is equal to all, but is specially inclined to the devotees, in the sense that He is
reciprocal to their devotion (as Kṛṣṇa in Bhagavad-gīta: ye yathā mām prapadyante...).
Though this is favoritism to the devatās (sura-priya), it is not the Lord’s fault, but His
ornament.
To elaborate this subject of the Lord’s imaprtial nature, Śukadeva Gosvāmī now quotes a
conversation that happenned between Yudhiṣṭīra Mahārāja and Nārada Muni. This conversation
that begins from the next verse continues upto the end of the seventh canto.
13-21: YUDHIṢṬHIRA ASKS NĀRADA ABOUT THE LORD’S MERCY ON DEMONS
13-15. Formerly, at the rājasūya sacrifice of Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, Śiśupāla merged into
the body of the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa (sāyujya-mukti). Struck with wonder, Yudhiṣṭhira inquired
about this from Nārada Muni, in the presence of many sages. Nārada then cited a historical
incident.
16-21: Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja’s questions to Nārada Muni
16. Śiśupāla was envious. This is astonishing that he attained Vāsudeva (sāyujyamukti), which
is impossible even for great transcendentalists.
17. Formerly King Vena fell to hell through the brāhmaṇas for blaspheming the Lord
(bhagavan nindayā).
18. Sinful Śiśupāla began blaspheming Kṛṣṇa from his childhood, when he could not even
speak properly, even until now. His brother Dantavakra was also similarly evil-minded
(durmatiḥ).
19. Śiśupāla and Dantavakra, although repeatedly blasphemed Lord Kṛṣṇa, the indestructible
Supreme Brahman, their tongues were not attacked by white leprosy nor did they enter the
darkest region of hell. This is surprising.
20. How was it possible for such blasphemous and envious people to enter into the body of
Kṛṣṇa so easily in front of everyone, which is very difficult?
Śiśupāla and Dantavakra were formerly Jaya and Vijaya, the doorkeepers of Vaikuṇṭha.
Sāyujya-mukti or merging into the body of Kṛṣṇa was not their final destination, but only a
temporary state. They later attained the liberations of sārūpya (having the same form as
the Lord) and sālokya (living in the same planet as the Lord).
Dantavakra’s liberation was not yet heard by Yudhiṣṭhira. Nārada would describe it to
him later. But Yudhiṣṭhira understood that Dantavakra would die and thus said this.
21. My intelligence is disturbed, by this most wonderful matter, like a flame in the wind. O
omniscient sage, kindly explain the reason for this.
22. Nārada was pleased to hear Yudhiṣṭhira’s request. Nārada Muni knew everything and
thus began to reply in front of everyone in the sacrifice as follows.
23-33: NĀRADA MUNI DESCRIBES THE GLORY OF ABSORPTION IN KṚṢṆA
23. The material body is meant to experience dualities of blasphemy (nindana), praise (stava),
honor (satkāra) and dishonour (nyakkāra), which are created due to ignorance, under the
influence of external energy.
nindana-stava-satkāra- nyakkārārthaṁ kalevaram
pradhāna-parayo rājann avivekena kalpitam
24. The conditioned soul identifies with the body and its belongings (conception of mamāham
or ‘mine and I’), and thus he is subjected to dualities of praise and chastisement, and considers
people to be friends and enemies.
25. But the Supreme Lord has no material body, so He is unaffected by material dualities of
praise and blasphemy. His reciprocation with devotees and demons is only for their good.
The Lord’s body is nondifferent from Him. As Paramātmā He stays in everyone’s body
but doesn’t identify with the body.
The Lord is unaffected by dualities. He is indifferent to acquisitions. He is not subject to
the suffering of being blasphemed and the enjoyment of being praised.
Since the Lord is unaffected by criticism or praise, can one blaspheme Him? – “No! If one
criticizes the Lord, he will get bad karma (as said in the next verse indirectly).”
26. Somehow, concentrate mind on the Lord
tasmād vairānubandhena   Therefore, by enmity, or
nirvaireṇa bhayena vā  by devotion or by fear, or
snehāt kāmena vā yuñjyāt by affection or by lust – one should focus on the Lord
kathañcin nekṣate pṛthak somehow. He is not affected.
Vaira → Continuous enmity that leads to absorption in Kṛṣṇa. Eg: Kaṁsa, Śisupāla.
Nirvaira → Without enemity, or with bhakti. Eg: Parents of Kṛṣṇa.
Bhayena → Lust with fear. Eg: Gopīs who feared rejecting moral codes.
Bhayena va → Lust without fear. Eg: Married lover Rukmiṇī.
Kāma → Lust generated by prema (sneha).
Criticism to absorption: One who criticizes Kṛṣṇa is purified if his critisim leads to
continuous remembrance and absorption in the Lord. But if one’s criticism doesn’t lead to
such absorption, it creates bad karma and the criticizer goes to hell.
Recommendation: Although the Lord is unaffected by criticism and the criticizer is
purified, criticism is not a recommendation. What is recommended is favorable (anukūla)
devotional service, and not purposeful blasphemy. If uttering the Lord’s names with a
negative emotion is purifying, then what to speak of favorable chanting?
Two types of criticism of the Lord: (i) Favourable and (ii) Unfavourable.
Jaya and Vijaya were ordained to blaspheme Lord for three lives.
27. Enmity leads to more absorption in the Lord than through devotional service.
Nārada’s humility: Nārada Muni, being a pure devotee, feels himself deficient in his
absorption in Kṛṣṇa, and thus says that the envious demons are more intensely absorbed in
the Lord. This, however, shouldn’t be taken literally.
Absorption in the thought of Kṛṣṇa is the essential point conveyed in this verse. If an
envious mind can be so absorbed in the Lord, what then can be said of a devotee’s mind.
28-29. Constant thinking of Kṛṣṇa either with devotion or enmity frees one from all sins and
enables one to regain spiritual bodies, just as a grass worm turns into a bee by constant
meditation on the bee.
30. Liberation by thinking of Kṛṣṇa in any way
kāmād dveṣād bhayāt snehād   By lust, hatred, fear and affection
yathā bhaktyeśvare manaḥ    or devotion, thinking of Kṛṣṇa in the mind
āveśya tad-aghaṁ hitvā     with absorption and thus giving up sin or hatred,
bahavas tad-gatiṁ gatāḥ    many attained liberation.
The next verse gives examples of personalities who exhibited the emotions towards Kṛṣṇa
mentioned in the previous verse.
31. People who attained Kṛṣṇa in various ways
gopyaḥ kāmād bhayāt kaṁso   (i) The gopīs by conjugal desires for Kṛṣṇa
(ii) Kaṁsa by fear that Kṛṣṇa will kill him
dveṣāc caidyādayo nṛpāḥ    (iii) Śiśupāla and other kings by envy of Kṛṣṇa
sambandhād vṛṣṇayaḥ snehād   (iv) The Yadus and you (the Pāṇḍavas) by affectionate
yūyaṁ…             family relation with Kṛṣṇa
…bhaktyā vayaṁ vibho      (v) We (general devotees like Nārada) by bhakti
Kaṁsa attained sāyujya mukti (merging into the Lord).
Śisupāla, Dantavakra and Paundraka attained sārūpya mukti (same form as the Lord).
32. So, somehow concentrate the mind on Kṛṣṇa
katamo 'pi na venaḥ syāt pañcānāṁ The atheistic king Vena didn’t think of Kṛṣṇa in any of
puruṣaṁ prati          the above five ways, and thus didn’t get salvation.
tasmāt kenāpy upāyena        Therefore somehow or the other
manaḥ kṛṣṇe niveśayet       one should focus mind on Lord Kṛṣṇa3.
Having described the significance of absorption in Kṛṣṇa with love or hatred, Nārada Muni
will now address Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja’s concern in verse 19.
33. Śiśupāla and Dantavakra were formerly associates of Lord Viṣṇu named Jaya and Vijaya.
Being cursed by brāhmaṇas, they came to this world as demons.
34-35. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira asked, “This is unbelievable. What curse could affect the
servants of Lord Viṣṇu (hari-dāsa)? They are exclusively dedicated to the Lord and their bodies
are purely spiritual. How could they fall to the material world? Please describe the curse that
caused this.”
The associates of the Supreme Lord in the spiritual world descend to the material world
for the purpose of fulfilling the Lord’s desire. Their descent is comparable to Lord’s
descent and it is an action of spiritual energy. Jaya and Vijaya came to the material world
to fulfill the Lord’s desire to fight.
36-47: Nārada Muni describes the story of Jaya and Vijaya
36. Once the four Kumāras – Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanātana and Sanat-kumāra – went to Viṣṇu-
loka while wandering in the three worlds.
37. They looked like five year old children although they are the eldest sons of Brahmā.
Thinking them to be ordinary children, the two gatekeepes of Vaikuṇṭha Jaya and Vijaya forbade
them.
38. The Kumāras cursed Jaya and Vijaya, “You are agitated by passion and ignorance, and
are unfit to live at the lotus feet of Lord Madhudviṣa. Take birth as demons in the material
world.”
39. As Jaya and Vijaya were falling, the Kumāras told them kindly, “Your curse will end in
three births and you will be able to return to Vaikuṇṭha.”
40-43. First birth: Jaya and Vijaya thus descended to the material world as sons of Diti,
Hiraṇyakaśipu and Hiraṇyākṣa. They were killed by the Supreme Lord in His incarnations as
Nṛsiṁha-deva and Varāha respectively. Hiraṇyakaśipu desired to kill his son Prahlāda and
tortured him in many ways. But he couldn’t kill Prahlāda, as he was protected by Lord Visṇu, the
Supersoul and the equipoised Lord (samadarśanam).
44-45. Second birth: In the next birth, they appeared as Rāvaṇa and Kumbhakarṇa, the sons of
Viśravā and Keśinī. The Lord appeared as Rāmacandra and killed them. You may hear narrations
about Lord Rāma from Mārkaṇḍeya.
46. Third birth: They appeared as your cousins Śiṣupāla and Dantavakra. Being stuck by the
disc of Lord Kṛṣṇa, they are now free from the curse.
47. Salvation by absorption: They maintained a feeling of enmity towards the Lord for a long
time. Because of always thinking of Kṛṣṇa in this way they regained the shelter of Lord in
Vaikuṇṭha.
vairānubandha-tīvreṇa dhyānenācyuta-sātmatām
nītau punar hareḥ pārśvaṁ jagmatur viṣṇu-pārṣadau
48. Yudhiṣṭhira asked: “Why was there enmity between Hiraṇyakaśipu and his beloved son
Prahlāda? How did Prahlāda become such a great devotee of Kṛṣṇa?”
2 The word ‘vṛsṇis’ indicates the residents of Vṛndāvana, who had the topmost love for Kṛṣṇa.
3 Focussing mind on Kṛṣṇa with a favorable mood is the recommendation.
7.2 HIRAṆYAKAŚIPU, KING OF THE DEMONS
In 7.1.48, Yudhiṣṭhira Mahāraja asked Nārada Muni why Hiraṇyakaśipu was envious of his
own son Prahlāda. In this chapter, Nārada Muni narrates the story by explaining how
Hiraṇyakaśipu had become a staunch enemy of Lord Viṣṇu.
1. When Hiraṇyākṣa was killed by Lord Viṣṇu in the form of Varāha, his brother
Hiraṇyakaśipu became extremely angry and began to lament.
2-3. Hiraṇyakaśipu was filled with rage. Biting his lips, gazing at the sky with angry eyes,
terrible teeth, fierce glances and frowning eyebrows, he spoke to the demons.
4-12: Hiraṇyakaśipu instructs the demons
4-5. “Hear attentively and follow my words without delay, O Śambara, Śatabāhu, Namuci,
Vipracitti, Puloman and others!
6. Although Viṣṇu is equal to all (samena), He sided the insignificant devatās, being worshiped
by them, and killed my obedient and well-wishing brother.
7. Viṣṇu has given up neutrality, being influenced by māyā. Just as a restless child takes sides,
Viṣṇu, to please His devotees, the devatās, killed my brother in the form of a boar.
8-9. I shall behead that diplomatic Viṣṇu (kūte ahite) with my trident. With His blood, I shall
please my brother who is fond of sucking blood. When He is killed (naṣṭe), all the devatās will
wither away, just as when a tree’s root is cut, the branches and twigs dry up.
Kūṭe ahite indicates that “Viṣṇu has deceptive actions,” but it also means “Viṣṇu who
fights against cheaters like me.”
Naṣṭe can also mean that Viṣṇu becomes invisible, since He cannot be destroyed. The
devatās live only for Viṣṇu, who is their life. When He disappears from their sight, they
will dry up, out of separation.
Sometimes the demons also appreciate the full dependence of the devatās upon the mercy
of the Lord. This is indirect glorification of the devatās by the demons.
10. Meanwhile you destroy all people on the earth engaged in austerity, sacrifice, Vedic study,
vows and charity. Earth is flourishing due to brāhmaṇas’ austerity and kṣatriya strength.
11. Lord Viṣṇu has His root in the activities of dvijas (brāhmaṇas and kṣatriyas). He is the
personification of sacrifices and religious principles, and the shelter of the devatās, sages, Pitṛs
and all beings.
viṣṇur dvija-kriyā-mūlo yajño dharmamayaḥ pumān
devarṣi-pitṛ-bhūtānāṁ dharmasya ca parāyaṇam
Hiraṇyakaśipu’s plan: Destruction of brāhmaṇas → Destruction of yajña and dharma →
Death of Lord Viṣṇu → Death of devatās.
12. Immediately go destroy places wherever there are cows and brāhmaṇas, study of the
Vedas, and activities of varṇāśrama. Burn the cities and cut down the trees.”
13-16: The demons execute Hiraṇyakaśipu’s orders
13. The demons started persecuting the citizens, being ordered by their master. They are
already fond of such activities (kadana-priyāḥ).
14-15. They set fire to cities, villages, gardens, fields, forests, hermitages, cow protectors and
even government capitals. They destroyed bridges, city walls and gates, and cut down fruit
bearing trees.
16. People were disturbed by them repeatedly and thus gave up Vedic culture. As the sacrifices
stopped, the devatās didn’t get their oblations and left heaven.
17-61: HIRAṆYAKAŚIPU CONSOLES HIS RELATIVES
17-19. After performing death rites for his brother, Hiraṇyakaśipu tried to pacify his mother
Diti, sister-in-law Ruṣābhānu and his nephews Śakuni, Śambara and others. Although angry,
being a great politician, he knew how to act according to time and situation. Thus he spoke sweet
words as follows.
20-26: Hiraṇyakaśipu speaks philosophy
20. Don’t lament for a hero’s death, because a great hero’s death in front of his enemy is
glorious and desirable.
21. Separation is inevitable: The jīvas join together in a family by superior arrangement (daiva)
and get separated by their own karma, just as travelers join together at a restaurant and depart to
their respective destinations after drinking water.
22a. Qualities of the soul: (i) eternal (nityaḥ), (ii) inexhaustible (avyayaḥ), (iii) free from
material contamination (śuddhaḥ), (iv) can go anywhere in the material or spiritual worlds
(sarva-gaḥ), (v) full of knowledge (sarva-vit) and (vi) different from the body (paraḥ).
22b. Cause of entanglement: But because of ignorance and misuse of his slight independence,
the soul accepts subtle and gross bodies created by the material energy and thus subjected to so-
called material happiness and distress.
23. Examples
A tree seems to move when reflected in moving water.
The land apears to move when the eyes move due to some mental derangement.
24. Bodily identification (liṅga-bhāvanā): Similarly, when the mind is agitated by the
movement of modes, the soul, although pure and freed from subtle and gross bodies (aliṅgaḥ),
thinks that he is identical with those bodies (liṅga-vān).
25-26. Result of misidentification: In such a bewildered state, the jīva discriminates between
people as friends and enemies and thus enjoys or suffers in various material bodies. This
continued material life is called saṁsāra. Birth, death, lamentation, foolishness and anxiety are
due to such material considerations.
27-36: Hiraṇyakaśipu narrates the story of Suyajña
27-28. Old story: In this regard, there is an old historical example of a discourse by Yamarāja to
the relatives of a dead person. Please hear attentively. Suyajña was the king of Uśīnara. When he
was killed in a battle, his kinsmen began to lament.
29-30. The slain King Suyajña fell with his bejewelled armor smashed, ornaments fallen, hair
scattered, eyes lustreless, body smeared with blood, heart pierced by arrows, teeth still biting his
lips, face covered with dust and arms broken.
31-32. His queens cried seeing him thus killed by fate (vidhinā): “O lord, now that you are
killed, we are also killed.” They fell at his feet with tears, pounding their breasts. Their hair
disarrayed and ornaments fell. All this evoked sympathy of others.
33-34. The queens lamented saying –
“You were the maintainer of Uśīnara, and now you increase the lamentation of its population.
O lord, the cruel providence has taken you away from our sight.
You were a grateful husband and our most sincere friend. We cannot exist without you. We
will follow you (we will die – saha-maraṇa) and serve you.”
35-36. They didn’t allow the dead body to be burnt even though the sun was about to set.
Their cries reached the abode of Yamarāja, who then personally came in the form of boy to
advice them.
Verses 37-57 describe the instructions of Yamarājā to the queens of Sujajña.
37-49: Yamarāja instructs the queens of Suyajña about the eternal soul
37. Alas, it is amazing that these people, older than me, who have seen thousands of births and
deaths are still bewildered. After death, one goes to an unknown place from where he has come.
There is no exception to this. Why to lament uselessly?
38. We are fortunate because, though we are children, very weak and unprotected by parents,
we have not been eaten by ferocious animals. The Supreme Lord who protected us in the womb
of mother will protect us everywhere.
Yamarāja thus expresses his wonder in the above two verses by comparing himself (a
young boy) with the queens who are much older than himself.
39. By the Supreme Lord’s will only is the world created, maintained and destroyed. This
world of moving and non-moving beings, is simply a plaything for Him, who is fully competent
to destroy and protect (nigraha-saṅgrahe prabhuḥ).
40. By the Supreme Lord’s protection, even lost money could be recovered and an unsheltered
person could survive in the forest. But without His mercy, money that is securely maintained
could also be lost and a well-protected person at home could die.
But is that the inequality in the Lord, because He favors one and ignores another?
41. The soul is different from the material bodies in different species that appear and
disappear by the karmas of the jīva.
42. But the soul identifies with the body due to ignorance, just as a householder thinks himself
to be identical to the house although he is different.
43. The soul is separate from the body just as –
Fire is separate from wood although situated within it
Air is separate although situated within the mouth and nostrils
Sky never mixes with anything, although all-pervading
Still the relatives of a dead person cannot understand this.
44. The actual person is invisible: Your lamentation is contradictory, O fools! The person
named Suyajña, for whom you lament, is still lying before you. You have never seen the person
within the body who heard you and replied.
45. Soul and Supersoul: The life air in the body is most important, yet it is also not the listener
or the speaker. Beyond the life air is the soul who is the possessor of the senses. The soul is
directed by the Supersoul, the ultimate proprietor of all senses.
46. By his own power (svena tejasā) or knowledge, the jīva accepts and gives up higher and
lower material bodies made of the five elements, ten senses and the mind.
The jīva has the freewill to either follow higher spiritual instructions and go to the spiritual
world or choose to remain in the material world.
47. Bondage and misery: As long as the soul is covered by subtle body (liṅgānvito), he is bound
to the results of his fruitive acts (karma-nibandhanam). That bondage leads to miseries and a
strong relationship with māyā.
48. It is a fruitless misconception (vitathābhiniveśo) to see and talk of the effects of modes as if
they are permanent. Just as mental concoctions (manorathā) and dreams (svapna) are
insubstantial, the happiness and distress produced by material senses (aindriyakam) are
meaningless (mṛṣā).
49. Those who are in knowledge of the eternal soul (nityam) and perishable body (anityam) do
not lament. Others are prone to lamentation. It is difficult to educate them.
Despite being enlightened by Yamarāja (in the form of a boy), the wives of King Suyajña
didn’t stop their lamentation. So Yamarāja then narrated the following story.
50-56: Yamarāja narrates story of Kuliṅga birds
50-52. A hunter captured the female bird: Once there lived a hunter as if appointed by death
personified as the killer of the birds in the forest. Once he saw a pair of kuliṅga birds and
captured the female bird by his lure. Seeing his wife in danger and beig unable to release her, the
male bird lamented.
53-55. The male kuliṅga bird lamented:
Providence is merciless. What will Providence gain by putting my wife in this awkward
position.
Let Him take me also. My wife is half of my body, what is the use of my living with only half
body?
The baby birds are helpless. How shall I maintain them who haven’t developed wings?
56. The hunter killed the male bird with an arrow as he was lamenting.
57. Yamaraj concludes: O foolish women, even if you lament for hundreds of years, your
husband will not be alive, and in the meantime your lives will be finished.
58-59. Everyone was struck with wonder at the instructions of Yamarāja, in the form of a boy.
Yamarāja disappeared and Suyajña’s relatives did his funeral ceremony.
60. Hiraṇyakaśipu concludes: Therefore do not be aggrieved for loss of body.
61. Nārada Muni concludes: After hearing the instructions, Diti and others forgot their grief.
7.3 HIRAṆYAKAŚIPU’S PLAN TO BECOME IMMORTAL
Having consoled his relatives, Hiraṇyakaśipu goes to do austerities to become immortal.
1. Hiraṇyakaśipu desired to be – (i) unconquerable (ajeyam), (ii) free from old age (ajara), (iii)
deathless (amaram), (iv) without rival (apratidvandvam) and (v) the sole king of the entire
universe (eka-rājam).
With these desires Hiraṇyakaśipu goes to perform austerities.
2. Hiraṇyakaśipu did severe austerities in the valley of Mandara mountain by – (i) standing on
his toes, (ii) keeping his arms upward and (iii) looking toward the sky.
3-5. Effect of Hiraṇyakaśipu’s austerities
i. Light emanated from his locks of hair as the sunrays during dissolution
ii. Wandering devatās returned to their homes
iii. Fire emanated from his head and spread everywhere and heated up all planets
iv. All the rivers and oceans were agitated
v. The surface of the globe, with its mountains and islands, began trembling
vi. The stars and planets fell
vii. All directions were ablaze
Disturbed by Hiraṇyakaśipu’s severe austerities, all the devatās left their planets and went to
the planet of Lord Brahmā, the creator, and informed him as follows.
6-13: THE DEVATĀS’ APPEAL TO LORD BRAHMĀ
6-8. Please stop these disturbances: O lord of the devatās! O master of the universe! We are
scorched and unable to stay in our planets. If you think it proper, kindly stop these disturbances,
before your obedient citizens are annihilated. Although you might know, please hear of
Hiraṇyakaśipu’s intentions behind his austerities.
9-11. Please hear Hiraṇyakaśipu’s plans:
“I will occupy Brahmā’s post. Brahmā got his exalted post by austerities (tapa), mystic power
(yoga) and trance (samādhi) and became most worshipable devatā in the universe. I shall
endeavor in a similar way and occupy his post, since I (the soul) am eternal and time is eternal. I
prefer this to even Dhruvaloka.
I shall reverse the results of pious and impious activities.
I shall over turn all the established practices within this world.”
12-13. Please take suitable action: Your post is most auspicious for everyone in the universe,
especially for the cows and brāhmaṇas, for material happiness and opulence. But if that demon
takes your position, everything will be lost.
14-38: LORD BRAHMĀ GIVES BENEDICTIONS TO HIRAṆYAKAŚIPU
14-16. Brahmā went to see Hiraṇyakaśipu, along with Bhṛgu, Dakṣa and other sages. Brahmā
initially couldn’t see Hiraṇyakaśipu, whose body was covered by an anthill, grass and bamboo.
The ants had devoured his skin, fat, flesh and blood. Spotting him, struck with wonder, Brahmā
smiled and spoke to him.
17-21: Lord Brahmā addresses Hiraṇyakaśipu
17. Perfect: Now you are perfect in austerities. Ask from me whatever you desire.
18. Astonishing: Its astonishing to see your endurance. In spite of being eaten by all kinds of
insects, your life air is circulating within your bones.
19. Unparallelled: Previous great sages like Bhṛgu also could not do such austerities, nor will
anyone in the future will. Who can sustain his life without even water for 100 celestial years?
20. Conquered: Your determination and unprecedented austerity have conquered me.
21. Boons: I will give you all benedictions. Your audience with me will not go in vain.
22-25: Hiraṇyakaśipu gets revived
22-23. Brahmā enlivened Hiraṇyakaśipu by sprinkling upon him divine water from his
kamaṇḍalu. Hiraṇyakaśipu arose as a young man with body as strong as thunderbolt, and lustre
resembling molten gold.
24-25. Hiraṇyakaśipu was pleased seeing Lord Brahmā and fell flat on the ground. Rising up,
he was overwhelmed by jubilation. With tears in his eyes and hairs standing on end, he prayed in
a faltering voice.
26-34: Hiraṇyakaśipu glorifies Lord Brahmā
Although Hiraṇyakaśipu praises Brahmā in this section as if he were the Supreme Lord, it
is Lord Kṛṣṇa who is the original creator and master of this cosmic manifestation. Brahmā
is only the secondary creator. Lord Kṛṣṇa empowers Brahmā as the engineer to create this
phenomenal world. Thus the following glories should actually be attributed to Lord Kṛṣṇa.
26-27. Obeisances unto the great, supreme and self-effulgent lord Brahmā who is the shelter of
the three modes. When the universe is covered by darkness by the influence of time at the end of
his day, he manifests it again by his own effulgence, maintains it and destroys it, by the modes.
28-33: Hiraṇyakaśipu praises Lord Brahmā as –
Original personality within this universe (ādya)
The seed of cosmos (bīja)
The form of knowledge and realization (jñāna-vijñāna-mūrtaye)
One who applies mind and realized intelligence in creating this cosmos
Controller of all moving and non-moving living entities by the chief prāṇa
Master of all living entities (patiḥ prajānām)
Maintainer of the mind and senses
Lord of all the material elements and their qualities, and all desires
Propagator of seven kinds of sacrifices, headed by agniṣṭoma by the three Vedas
and four kinds of priests (hotā, udghātā, adhvaryū and brahma)
Supreme Soul of all beings, beginningless, endless and omniscient
Eternally awake, seeing everything that happens
Eternal time that reduces the life span of all living entities
Changeless, witness, unborn, great, all-pervading, cause of life for all
Not separate from anything, be it better or lower, stationary or moving
Has body formed by knowledge of scriptures
Hiraṇyagarbha, containing the universe in belly
Greatest and transcendental to the world of three modes
Universal form in this world, although situted in his own abode
Brahman, the Supersoul, the oldest Lord
Pervades the universe with an unlimited and unmanifested form
Endowed with material and spiritual energies
Anticipating Brahmā’s inability to bestow immortality, as Brahmā himself is not immortal,
Hiraṇyakaśipu cleverly asks a benediction to avoid death.
35-38: Hiraṇyakaśipu asks benedctions from Lord Brahmā
35-37a      Let me not meet death –
from any of the living entities created by you
within or outside of any residence
during the daytime or at night, on the ground or in the sky
by any others beyond you, by any weapon, human being or animal
from any living or nonliving entity
by any devatā or demon or snakes from the lower planets
37b
Let me not have any rival.
38a
Give me sole lordship over all the living entities and presiding deities
38b
Give me all the mystic powers attained by long austerities and yoga practice
7.4 HIRAṆYAKAŚIPU TERRORIZES THE UNIVERSE
This chapter describes – (i) how Hiraṇyakaśipu misuses his power gained by austerities and
defeats the devatās due to hatred for Lord Viṣṇu, and (ii) Prahlāda’s qualities that arose from his
prema-bhaki.
1-20: HIRAṆYAKAŚIPU’S NEFARIOUS ACTIVITIES AFTER RECEIVING BOONS
1-2. Lord Brahmā granted benedictions asked by the demon Hiraṇyakaśipu, being satisfied
with difficult austerities. He said, “Although these benedictions are difficult to obtain
(durlabhān), I shall grant you those rare boons.”
Durlabhān: Material benedictions are exactly not worthy of being called benedictions, for
they could become curses. Just as it takes great endeavor to acquire those boons, it is
difficult to maintain them as well. Thus, although Hiraṇyakaśipu attained great boons from
Brahmā, they are still not attained (durlabhān).
3. Brahmā then departed being worshiped by Hiraṇyakaśipu and praised by sages.
4. Hiraṇyakaśipu’s envy: He acquired a lustrous golden body by Brahmā’s boons. He
remembered the death of his brother and continued to be envious of Lord Viṣṇu.
5-7. Hiraṇyakaśipu’s influence: He conquered all directions and planets in the three worlds
including that of the human beings, the devatās, the serpents, the Garuḍas and so on. Conquering
the abodes of all, he seized their power and influence.
8-11. Hiraṇyakaśipu resided in Indra’s heavenly palace (mahendra-bhavana), built by
Viśvakarmā and endowed with all opulences and beautiful celestial gardens. That palace has – (i)
steps made of coral (ii) floor bedecked with emeralds (iii) walls made of crystal (iv) columns
with vaidūrya (v) colorful canopies (vi) seats bedecked with rubies (vii) silk bedding as white as
foam decorated with pearls and (vii) ladies with beautiful faces, teeth and ankle bells tinkling
melodiously, who saw their own beautiful reflections in the gems.
12. He oppressed the devatās, who had to bow at his feet. As a powerful conqueror, dictator
(eka-rāṭ) and severe ruler (caṇḍa-śāsana), he chastised them for no reason.
Even in the higher planetary systems, to which people are promoted by pious activities,
disturbances are created by demons like Hiraṇyakaśipu. No one in the three worlds can
live in peace and prosperity without disturbance. In the material world, sometimes even
great personalities can be controlled by demons (as will be seen in Verse 14).
13a. He was always intoxicated with his eyes rolling.
13b. Everyone worshipped him because of his austerity (tapa), yoga, physical and sensual
strength (bala and ojas). Except Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Śiva, the principal men of all planets offered
him presentations with their own hands.
14. Everyone offered him prayers, including the two Gandharvas Viśvāvasu and Tumburu, I
myself (Nārada) and the Vidyādharas, Apsarās and sages.
15. He usurped sacrificial shares (havir-bhāgān) for himself, offered by the strict followers of
varṇāśrama.
16-18. Hiraṇyakaśipu controls nature
Earth delivered abundant food grains without being plowed, like a surabhī cow
Cows supplied abundant milk
The outer space was decorated with wonderful phenomena
The seven oceans (of salt water, wine, ghee, sugarcane juice, yoghurt, milk and sweet water) of
the universe along with rivers (their wives) supplied various kinds of gems and jewels.
Mountains and valleys became fields of pleasure for Hiraṇyakaśipu.
Trees and plants produced fruits and flowers profusely in all seasons.
He alone performed the functions of all the devatās.
19. Yet dissatisfied: In spite of controlling all directions and enjoying all kinds of sense
gratification, he was dissatisfied due to uncontrolled senses (ajitendriyaḥ).
sa itthaṁ nirjita-kakub eka-rāḍ viṣayān priyān
yathopajoṣaṁ bhuñjāno nātṛpyad ajitendriyaḥ
20. He thus passed a long time being proud of his opulence (aiśvarya-matta), and transgressing
the scriptural rules (ut-śāstra-vartina), being subjected to the curse of the Kumāras (brahma-
śāpam).
The word śāstra refers to that which controls our activities. We cannot violate or
transgress the principles mentioned in the śāstras. The material energy is so powerful that
as soon as one becomes materially opulent, he begins to transgress the śāstric laws and
thus enters upon the path of destruction.
21-29: THE DEVATĀS APPROACH LORD VIṢṆU FOR PROTECTION
21. Everyone was distressed by the severe punishments of Hiraṇyakaśipu. The devatās in fear
and distress at last took shelter (śaraṇam) of Lord Viṣṇu (Acyuta).
Supreme shelter: In distress, one wants to seek shelter of a well-wishing friend. The well-
wishing friend of the perfect order is Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa. If from the very beginning we seek
His shelter, there will be no cause of danger. Seeking shelter of devatās and others is like
trying to cross the ocean by catching a dog’s tail.
22-23. The devatās worshiped Lord Hṛṣīkeśa with controlled minds, without sleep and living
only on their breath. They prayed, “Obeisances to the direction where the Supersoul and the
Supreme controller, Lord Hari is situated, where the purified peaceful sannyāsīs go, and from
where one does not return.”
Lord Hari is there in every direction, in every heart and in every atom. Yet the devatās
offer respects to the direction where Lord Hari stays. At that time, Hiraṇyakaśipu’s
influence was everywhere except the specific places (dhāmas) where the Supreme Lord
had His pastimes.
24. Then they heard a voice from a personality invisible to material eyes. It was –
i. As grave as the rumbling of a cloud (megha-niḥsvanā)
ii. Resounding in all directions (sannādayantī kakubhaḥ)
iii. Encouraging, driving away the fear of saintly persons (sādhūnām abhayaṅkarī)
25-28: Message of the Supreme Lord to the devatās
25. Do not fear, I am there
mā bhaiṣṭa vibudha-śreṣṭhāḥ       Do not fear, O best of learned persons!
sarveṣāṁ bhadram astu vaḥ         I wish all good fortune to you.
mad-darśanaṁ hi bhūtānāṁ sarva-      Seeing Me4 (by hearing and chanting about Me and
śreyopapattaye              offering prayers) gives highest benefit to all beings.
26. I shall stop Hiraṇyakaśipu’s evil acts which are known to Me. Please patiently wait for the
time when I will appear.
27. Envious person is vanquished
yadā deveṣu vedeṣu     When – towards (i) the devatās (ii) the Vedas
goṣu vipreṣu sādhuṣu    (iii) the cows (iv) brāhmaṇas (v) Vaiṣṇavas and
dharme mayi ca vidveṣaḥ   (vi) religious principles – one shows envy,
sa vā āśu vinaśyati    he and his civilization will be vanquished.
28. When Hiraṇyakaśipu teases his son Prahlāda, who is (i) without enemy (nrivaira), (ii)
peaceful (praśānta) and (iii) a great devotee (mahātma), – I shall kill him, despite the
benedictions of Brahmā.
Vaiṣṇava-aparādha: The Supreme Lord can tolerate anything, but not violence towards
His devotees. Of all sinful activities, an offense to a Vaiṣṇava is the most severe. All the
benedictions received by an offender would be null and void as soon as he commits an
offense at the lotus feet of a devotee.
A Vaiṣṇava is nirvaira, he has no enemies (See 3.25.21 also)
29. Thus being reassured by the Lord, the supreme spiritual master (loka-guru), the devatās
offered respects and returned, considering that the demon is already dead.
Even the devatās also approach the Supreme Lord Viṣṇu when harassed by demons. So, it
is better to approach the Supreme Lord for whatever benefits one desires, instead of
approaching the devatās (See 2.3.10).
30. Hiraṇyakaśipu had four wonderful sons. The best of them was Prahlāda, the reservoir of
transcendental qualities, because he was an unalloyed devotee of Viṣṇu.
31-32. Qualities of Prahlāda
i                 brahmaṇyaḥ           Qualified as a brāhmaṇa and
Devoted to spiritual knowledge
ii              śīla-sampannaḥ         Endowed with good character
iii              satya-sandho          Determined to understand the Absolute Truth and true to
his promise
iv                 jitendriyaḥ         Has full control of mind and senses
v           ātmavat sarva-bhūtānām     Like the Paramātmā, he is kind to all beings and their one
eka-priya-suhṛttamaḥ     dear best friend and well-wisher
vi         dāsavat sannatāryāṅghriḥ    Surrendered to feet of the wise like a menial servant
vii           pitṛvad dīna-vatsalaḥ    Kind to the poor like a father
viii        bhrātṛvat sadṛśe snigdho   Affectionate to equals like a brother
ix          guruṣv īśvara-bhāvanaḥ     Respectful to gurus seeing them as good as the Lord
x          vidyārtha-rūpa-janmāḍhyo    Endowed with education, wealth, beauty, good birth
xi          māna-stambha-vivarjitaḥ    Free of pride and unsubmissiveness
33. Further qualities of Prahlāda
i        nodvigna-citto vyasaneṣu Unagitated when put into dangers
ii       niḥspṛhaḥ śruteṣu dṛṣṭeṣu Not desirous of hearing or seeing sense objects or Vedic
guṇeṣv           fruitive acts
iii             avastu-dṛk         Saw the world as insubstantial
iv       dāntendriya-prāṇa-śarīra- Always controlled his senses, life air, body and
dhīḥ sadā          intelligence
v             praśānta-kāmo        He subdued all lusty desires
vi             rahitāsuro 'suraḥ       Although born in family of demons, he was devoid of
demoniac qualities such as envy
34. God’s qualities in a devotee: The wise glorify Prahlāda’s divine qualities (mahadguṇā):
“All good qualities of the Supreme Lord exist forever in His devotee Prahlāda.”
The Lord exists simultaneously in different places – in His Planet Goloka Vṛndāvana and
in the core of everyone's heart. Similarly Prahlāda still lives in Vaikuṇṭhaloka as well as
within this material world on the planet Sutala. A devotee can be qualified like the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, not in full but partially. The similarity in qualities of the
Lord and His devotees can be perceived only by wise men.
35. In saintly assemblies (sadhu-gāthā-sadasi), even the devatās cite Prahlāda as an example of
a great devotee (praimānam), what to speak of you?
36a. Prahlāda’s innumerable qualities cannot be listed. He is a great soul (mahātma).
36b. Prahlāda had natural attachment towards Lord Vāsudeva (vāsudeve bhagavati yasya
naisargikī ratiḥ), i.e., his attraction did not develop by sādhana over many births as is the case
with others.
37. Absorption in Kṛṣṇa; Disinterest in externals
i         nyasta-krīḍanako bālo He was uninterested in childish playthings
ii        jaḍavat tan-manastayā He seemed to be dull, being fully absorbed in Kṛṣṇa
iii       kṛṣṇa-graha-gṛhītātmā His mind was completely overcome by Kṛṣṇa
iv         na veda jagad īdṛśam  He could not understand how this world goes on, being
fully absorbed in the activities of sense enjoyment
38. Being always embraced by Govinda (govinda-parirambhitaḥ), Prahlāda was not aware of
his actions of sitting, walking, eating, lying down, drinking and talking.
Just as a one year old baby is constantly embraced on the lap of its mother, Prahlāda was
embraced by the Lord while doing all his activities. No one else saw the Lord.
39-41. Prahlāda’s symptoms of ecstasy: Sometimes Prahlāda would –
Cry (rudati) when his mind was troubled (śabala-cetanaḥ) due to Lord’s absence
Laugh (hasati) upon seeing the Lord again
Be joyful on thinking of the Lord (tat-cintā-hlādaḥ) and sing loudly (udgāyati)
Loudly call out (nadati) the Lord in full anxiety (utkaṇṭha)
Dance in jubilation without shyness
Imitate (anucakāra) the Lord’s pastimes, being absorbed in His thoughts (tadbhāvanā-yukta
and feeling oneness with Him (tanmaya)
Be silent (tūṣṇīm) with hairs standing on end (utpulakas)
Feel the touch of the Lord's hands and become blissful (saṁsparśa-nirvṛtaḥ)
Not move and shed tears from his half-closed eyes due to his love for the Lord
42. Power of good association
sa uttama-śloka-padāravindayor   By his association with pure devotees who had nothing
niṣevayākiñcana-saṅga-labdhayā   to do with anything material, Prahlāda constantly
engaged in service of Lord’s lotus feet
tanvan parāṁ nirvṛtim ātmano muhur Prahlāda constantly inspired highest transcendental bliss
duḥsaṅga-dīnasya manaḥ śamaṁ By seeing his ecstatic bodily features, persons very poor
vyadhāt               in spiritual understanding became purified
43. Hiraṇyakaśipu tormented Prahlāda, the broad-minded (mahātma), fortunate (mahā-
bhāga) and exalted devotee (mahā-bhāgavata), although he was his own son.
One who oppresses a pure devotee loses all the results of his austerities, penances and
pious activities.
44. How did Hiraṇyakaśipu give so much trouble to his pure (śuddha) and saintly (sādhu) son
Prahlāda? O best of spiritual leaders, I wish to know about this.
45. Parents are affectionate to their children. They chastise if children are disobedient or naughty,
but it is for their instruction and not out of enmity.
46. How was it possible for a father to be so violent to his obedient, respectful and well-behaved
son? Kindly dissipate our doubts in this regard.
4 Mad-darśanam: The ability to understand the Lord or to see Him or talk with Him depends on one's advancement in bhakti or
devotional service (bhaktyā mām abhijānāti).
HIRAṆYAKAŚIPU
In respose to Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja’s questions in 7.4.44-46, Nārada Muni explains how
Hiraṇyakaśipu became so violent towards Prahlāda.
1-32: PRAHLĀDA’S DEVOTION TO VIṢṆU AND HIRAṆYAKAŚIPU’S RESPONSE
1-3: Prahlāda’s education under Śukrācārya’s sons
1. The demons accepted Śukrācārya as their priest for rituals (paurohitya). His two sons,
Śaṇḍa and Amarka, lived near Hiraṇyakaśipu's palace.
Śukrācārya accepted the priesthood of demons for material benefits. A real brāhmaṇa
should become priest of a person interested in spiritual advancement, not atheistic men.
2. Prahlāda was sent for education to Śaṇḍa and Amarka, along with other boys born of
demons, although Prahlāda was already knowledgeable in politics, morals and devotion (naya-
kovidān).
3. Prahlāda didn’t like political philosophy taught by his teachers, since it involved thinking in
terms of duality of oneself and others (sva-para) or enemy and friend.
A devotee sees everyone as part and parcel of the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa. He never creates a
situation of material friendship and enmity with others.
4-10: Prahlāda instructs Hiraṇyakaśipu in bhakti
4. Once Hiraṇyakaśipu asked Prahlāda affectionately, taking him on his lap: “Please tell me
what you consider to be the best of all subjects (manyate sādhu yad bhavān).”
5. Prahlāda’s reply: “Give up family life and take shelter of Hari”
tat sādhu manye 'suravarya dehināṁ O best of the demons, I think the best thing for all the
embodied beings
sadā samudvigna-dhiyām asad- who are always full of anxieties, with minds absorbed in
grahāt               “I and mine” conception is –
hitvātma-pātaṁ gṛham andha-kūpaṁ to give up the soul degrading, blind-well like
materialistic household life, and
vanaṁ gato yad dharim āśrayeta go to forest (Vṛndāvana) and take shelter of the Supreme
Lord Hari.
Hiraṇyakaśipu expected something pleasing to hear from Prahlāda, but nothing practical. He
was surprised to hear such profound words from his young son.
6-7. Hiraṇyakaśipu laughed and said, “The intelligence of children is being spoiled by the
words of the enemy (para-pakṣa). Protect this boy at guru-kula from the Vaiṣṇavas who may go
there in disguise as brāhmaṇas.”
Prahlāda’s teachers were astonished to see that a small boy could speak such exalted Vaiṣṇava
philosophy. So they inquired from him about the Vaiṣṇavas who stealthily taught him, so that
they could be arrested and killed by Hiraṇyakaśipu.
8-10. Śaṇḍa and Amarka asked Prahlāda mildly after coming back to guru-kula: “All good
fortune unto you. Please speak the truth. Other boys do not speak like you. How have you
learned these instructions? Who polluted your intelligence?”
Prahlāda will now respond that his intelligence has not been polluted. By the grace of his guru
(Nārada Muni), he learnt that no one is his friend or enemy. Everyone is an eternal servant of
Lord Kṛṣṇa.
11-14: Prahlāda answers the question of Śaṇḍa and Amarka
11. Māyā’s effect: The Lord’s māyā has created the material conception of life (asadgrāhaḥ)
that distinguishes people as ‘friends’ and ‘enemies’ (sva-para), by deluding the intelligence
(vimohita-dhiyāṁ) of men. My respects to that Supreme Lord.
12. Lord’s grace: When God is pleased with someone, – (i) one’s animal intelligence (paśu-
buddhi) is destroyed and (ii) one doesn’t make distinctions of friends and enemies.
Duality: As long as one adheres to the philosophy of duality, thinking one person a friend
and another an enemy, he is in the clutches of māyā.
Oneness: Every living entity is a part and parcel of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is the well-wisher of
all jīvas and all jīvas are His eternal servants. Thus they are all one.
Vaiṣṇava thinking or Vaikuṇṭha thinking is to be friendly with other servants of the Lord
and appreciate their service, and not be proud of one’s own service. There may be apparent
competition amongst the servants, but there is no envy. Everyone is allowed to serve the
Lord to the best of one’s ability.
Distinction: The jīvas and the Lord are one in spiritual indentity, but the jīvas are not equal
to God as the Māyāvādīs think. No one is equal to God. The servant cannot be equal to the
master. Their distinction must continue even in the liberated stage.
13. My intelligence is different from yours due to the Lord, your so-called enemy. People with
faulty intelligence (abuddhibhiḥ) see in terms of oneself and others, and cannot ascertain the
Supersoul. Even the knowers of the Vedas like Brahmā are sometimes bewildered (what to speak
of you?).
14. My consciousness is naturally attracted to Lord Viṣṇu (Cakrapāṇi, who holds the disc) just
as iron is naturally attracted to a magnet. Thus I have no independence.
Kṛṣṇa means one who attracts everyone. To be attracted to Kṛṣṇa is the natural position of
every living entity. There is no cause or goal in such attraction and it is not induced by
anything external. The highest examples of such attraction are the Vrajavāsis.
Due to material contamination one may not be attracted to Kṛṣṇa, but once one is purified
of that contamination by the practice of bhakti, one is again attracted to Kṛṣṇa.
15-18: Śaṇḍa and Amarka chastise and teach Prahlāda
15. Śaṇḍa and Amarka became angry and chastised Prahlāda as follows:
An actual brāhmaṇa is satisfied to see everyone as a devotee of Krsna, what to speak of a
disciple. But Śaṇḍa and Amarka did not have real brahminical qualifications and served
demons.
16-17. They chastised Prahlāda, “Bring a stick. He deserves punishment. By his bad
intelligence (durbuddhi), he is defaming our dynasty like a cinder (kulāṇgāra). He is like a thorn
tree in the sandalwood forest of demoniac dynasty. Viṣṇu is like the axe (paraśu) to cut that
forest and Prahlāda is like the handle of that axe.”
18. They forcefully taught Prahlāda the paths of religion, economic development and sense
gratification (dharma, artha and kāma).
19-24: Prahlāda describes nava-vidhā-bhakti to Hiraṇyakaśipu
19. Next meeting: Śaṇḍa and Amarka thought that Prahlāda was educated in the four diplomatic
principles5 (catuṣṭayaṁ) of public leaders. One day after Prahlāda was nicely bathed and
decorated by his mother, they presented him before his father.
20-21. Fatherly affection: Prahlāda offered obeisances to Hiraṇyakaśipu, who then happily
embraced him and showered his blessings. Placing Prahlāda on his lap, Hiraṇyakaśipu spoke
with affection and tears in his eyes that moistened the boy.
22. Hiraṇyakaśipu asked Prahlāda: “My dear son, please repeat whatever you think is the best
of the knowledge taught by your teacher.”
Prahlāda had two kinds of teachers – Śukrācārya’s sons who taught him materialistic
diplomacy, and Nārada Muni who enlightened him in spiritual knowledge when he was in his
mother’s womb. The teacher refers to the son of Śukrācārya from Hiraṇyakaśipu’s point of view,
but it refers to Nārada from Prahlāda’s point of view. Thus Prahlāda replies with what he learnt
from Nārada Muni.
23-24. Prahlāda’s reply: “Nine processes of Bhakti”
śravaṇaṁ            (1) Hearing about the glories of Supreme Lord. Ex:
Parīkṣit
kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ         (2) Chanting Viṣṇu’s names, qualities and pastimes. Ex: Śukadeva
smaraṇaṁ             (3) Remembering Him. Ex: Prahlāda Mahārāja
pāda-sevanam           (4) Serving His lotus feet (menial service). Ex:
Lakṣmīdevī
arcanaṁ            (5) Worshiping His deity with 16 types of paraphernalia.
Ex: Pṛthu
vandanaṁ             (6) Offering prayers unto Him. Ex: Akrūra
dāsyaṁ            (7) Becoming His servant. Ex: Hanumān
(8) Considering Him one's best friend, with firm faith.
sakhyam
Ex: Arjuna
(9) Surrendering everything unto Him (i.e., serving Him
ātma-nivedanam              with body, mind and words). Ex: Ambarīṣa Mahārāja
iti puṁsārpitā viṣṇau bhaktiś cen    These are nine kinds of devotional service offered by a
nava-lakṣaṇā              human being unto the Supreme Lord Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa
kriyeta bhagavaty addhā tan manye     One who has dedicated his life to such service is the
'dhītam uttamam             most learned, for he has acquired complete knowledge
25-29: Hiraṇyakaśipu’s anger
25-27. Hiraṇyakaśipu became angry and chastised the teachers: “O unqualified brāhmaṇa
(brahma-bandhu). You have disobeyed my order and taught this poor boy this nonsense
(asāram) about devotional service to my enemy! Your real nature is now manifested. The enmity
of deceptive friends (like you) in false garbs will be manifest in course of time, just as disease
manifests in sinful man.”
Asāram means unworthy or insubstantial. For a demon there is no substance in bhakti, but
to a devotee devotional service is the only essential factor in life.
28. The son of Śukrācārya replied, “We did not teach anything that your son spoke. Bhakti has
naturally developed in him. Please do not accuse us unnecessarily.”
29. Hiraṇyakaśipu asked Prahlāda, “You are most fallen of our family. If your gurus haven’t
taught you this knowledge, where have you gotten this inauspicious mentality (abhadra-asati-
mati)?”
30-32: Prahlāda instructs bhakti to Hiraṇyakaśipu more strongly
30. Nature and destination of materialistic householders
matir na kṛṣṇe parataḥ svato vā The attached householders’ inclination towards Kṛṣṇa is
mitho 'bhipadyeta gṛha-vratānām never aroused by (i) others’ instructions (ii) own efforts
or (iii) a combination of both
adānta-gobhir viśatāṁ tamisraṁ Due to uncontrolled senses, they enter hellish life
punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām and repeatedly chew the chewed
Understanding Kṛṣṇa is possible only by serving a pure devotee and training under him.
31. Materialists are ignorant, ambitious, misled and entangled
na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ Ignorant: They don’t understand that Lord Viṣṇu is their
real interest (goal of life)
durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ Ambitious: Being ambitious to enjoy material world,
they consider sense objects valuable
andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānās Misled: As blind men (bogus gurus) led by another blind
man fall into ditch
te 'pīśa-tantryām uru-dāmni baddhāḥ Entangled: they are strongly bound by ropes of material
nature and suffer threefold miseries
32. Power of serving a Vaiṣṇava
naiṣāṁ matis tāvad urukramāṅghriṁ Their consciousness will not be attached to Lord
spṛśaty anarthāpagamo yad-arthaḥ Urukrama’s lotus feet that destroys unwanted things
(samsāra)
mahīyasāṁ pāda-rajo-'bhiṣekaṁ till they smear their bodies with the dust of great
niṣkiñcanānāṁ na vṛṇīta yāvat  devotees, who are free from material contamination
33-44: HIRAṆYAKAŚIPU’S ATTEMPTS TO KILL PRAHLĀDA
33-34b. Hiraṇyakaśipu, blinded by anger, threw Prahlāda off his lap onto the ground. Indignant
and angry, his eyes were reddish like molten copper.
Although Prahlāda maintained an attitude of noncooperation with the philosophy of his
father, yet he was tolerant and humble. But Hiraṇyakaśipu, being a nondevotee, wanted to
kill his own small son.
34b-36. Hiraṇyakaśipu ordered his servants to kill Prahlāda: “O demons! This boy deserves
to be killed. Kill him as soon as possible! He is the killer of my brother, for he is engaged in
bhakti of our enemy Viṣṇu. Even at this young age he has given up his affection for his parents.
He is certainly untrustworthy.”
Prahlāda would be elevated to sārūpya liberation (that awards one to have a similar form
as Lord Viṣṇu) and in that sense he resembled Lord Viṣṇu.
34b-36. Hiraṇyakaśipu ordered his servants to kill Prahlāda: “O demons! This boy deserves
to be killed. Kill him as soon as possible! He is the killer of my brother, for he is engaged in
bhakti of our enemy Viṣṇu. Even at this young age he has given up his affection for his parents.
He is certainly untrustworthy.”
Hiraṇyakaśipu’s servants might ask him, “How can we kill your son?”
37-38. Hiraṇyakaśipu justifies killing his son
“Medicinal herb, though born in the forest, if beneficial, must be kept carefully. Similarly, if an
outsider is favorable, he must be protected like a son.
A bodily limb must be amputated, if it is diseased, so that the rest of the body may live happily.
Similarly, even one’s own son, if unfavorable, must be rejected.
Uncontrolled senses are the enemies of all yogīs. Similarly, this Prahlāda is an enemy because I
cannot control him. So he must be killed by all means.”
39-44: Attempts to kill Prahlāda fail
39-41. Prahlāda’s undisturbed meditation: The fierce looking demons then began striking the
tender parts of Prahlāda with their tridents. But Prahlāda sat silently meditating on Viṣṇu, the
unchangeable, transcendental Supersoul of the entire universe. The demons’ weapons had no
tangible effects on Prahlāda, like the good deeds of an unfortunate person.
42. Hiraṇyakaśipu became fearful and began contriving other means to kill Prahlāda.
43-44. Various attempts to kill Prahlāda: Hiraṇyakaśipu couldn’t kill Prahlāda by –
i. Throwing him beneath the feet of big elephants
ii. Throwing him among huge snakes
iii. Employing destructive spells
iv. Hurling him from the top of a hill
v. Conjuring up illusory tricks
vi. Imprisoning him
vii. Administering poison
viii. Starving him
ix. Exposing him to severe cold, winds, fire and water
x. Throwing heavy stones to crush him
When all these failed, Hiraṇyakaśipu was in great anxiety about what to do next.
45-57: PRAHLĀDA SENT TO SCHOOL AGAIN
45-47. Hiraṇyakaśipu’s thoughts, “I called him many ill names and devised many means to kill
him, but he saved himself by his own powers. Although near to me and merely a child, he is
completely fearless, never forgetting Viṣṇu. He is like a dog’s tail (śunaḥ-śepa), never to be
straightened. His strength is unlimited. He appears immortal. Perhaps due to my enmity toward
him, I shall die.”
48-50. Śaṇḍa and Amarka advised Hiraṇyakaśipu secretly, “There is no reason for you to be
morose. You have conquered all three worlds. All the devatās are afraid simply by the movement
of your eyebrows. Prahlāda is a small child and his bad or good qualities have no value. Until
Śukrācārya returns, arrest him with Varuṇa’s ropes, so that he will not flee in fear. He will
change by age and service to ācārya.”
51. Hiraṇyakaśipu agreed to their instructions and requested them to instruct royal household
duties (rājñāṁ yo gṛha-medhinām) to Prahlāda.
52. Śaṇḍa and Amarka taught Prahlāda, who was very submissive and humble, about dharma,
artha and kāma very systematically and unceasingly.
53. Prahlāda did not like them, for such instructions are based on the duality of worldly affairs,
which involve one in a materialistic way of life.
54. Prahlāda’s classmates would call him for playing, in the absence of teachers.
55. Prahlāda addressed his friends in sweet words (ślakṣṇayā vācā) and began to teach them
about the uselessness of the materialistic way of life.
56-57. All the children were – (i) respectful (gauravāt) to Prahlāda, and (ii) not so polluted
(adūṣita-dhiyo) by their teachers. So they surrounded Prahlāda to hear him with eyes fixed on
him. Prahlāda, a mahā-bhāgavata, desired their welfare and began instructing them.
5 They are – (i) sāma, the process of pacifying (ii) dāna, the process of giving money in charity (iii) bheda, the principle of
dividing and (iv) daṇḍa, the principle of punishment.
7.6 PRAHLĀDA INSTRUCTS HIS DEMONIAC
SCHOOLMATES
Prahlāda Mahārāja instructs his schoolmates about bhakti in their leisure time.
1. Human life is very rare
kaumāra ācaret prājño              Right from one’s childhood, an intelligent person
dharmān bhāgavatān iha              should perform devotional service in this life.
durlabhaṁ mānuṣaṁ janma               Because the human form of life is rarely achieved.
tad apy adhruvam arthadam             Although temporary it is very effective for bhakti.
Why bhakti from kaumāra age? – One may say that one can start bhakti in yauvana also!
But the wise person understands that he may die at the end of kaumāra age. One may say
that one can practice bhakti in a future life as well! Human birth is very rare. Although
human life is also short, it is effective (arthadam). King Khātvāṅga and others achieved
success by having bhakti for only a few moments.
How to perform bhāgavata-dharma? One should perform it by the methods which enable one
to attain surrender to the lotus feet of Lord Viṣṇu.
2. Every human being must do devotional service to the lotus feet of Lord Viṣṇu (viṣṇoḥ
pādopasarpaṇam). This is natural because Viṣṇu is the most beloved (priya), the master of the
soul (ātmeśvaraḥ), and the well-wisher (suhṛt) of all beings.
Goal of education: The jīva has an eternal intimate relation with the Supreme Lord. But
because he has forgotten it, he is suffering, life after life. Our eternal relationship with God
can be revived in the human life, and that should be the goal of education.
What is the problem with endeavoring for material happiness?
3. Happiness of the senses can be obtained –
i. due to possessing a material body (deha yogena)
ii. in any species (sarvatra labhyate)
iii. without endeavour (ayatnataḥ)
iv. by superior arrangement (daivād)
just as one obtains distress without endeavor.
sukham aindriyakaṁ daityā deha-yogena dehinām
sarvatra labhyate daivād yathā duḥkham ayatnataḥ
Best utility of human life lies in reviving our relation with God, instead of wasting one’s
time and energy to fight against distress and work hard for happiness.
4. One shouldn’t endeavor for material happiness, for it only depletes one’s lifespan (āyur-
vyayaḥ), and results in no benefit (na tathā vindate kṣemaṁ). One must endeavor for worshiping
the lotus feet of Lord Mukunda to surely attain the spiritual platform.
tat-prayāso na kartavyo yata āyur-vyayaḥ param
na tathā vindate kṣemaṁ mukunda-caraṇāmbujam
5. Conclusion: Therefore, while in material existence (bhavam āśritaḥ), an intelligent human
being must endeavor for the highest goal of life as long as the body is strong.
Bhavam āśritaḥ refers to unnecessary problems in this world. This can also be read as
bhayam āśritah, which means material life is full of anxiety and fear.
Prahlāda’s instruction in Verse 2 indicates rāga-bhakti or spontaneous devotional service
and Verse 5 indicates vaidhi-bhakti or regulated devotional service.
6-18: HOW IS HUMAN LIFE MISUSED?
6-8. The 100 years of human life are wasted by one whose senses are uncontrolled –
50 years in sleep (12 hours of daily sleep)
20 years in childhood and sporting
20 years in oldage / invalidity
Remaining years in family attachments
Thus one wastes one’s human life without taking interest in devotional service.
Thus at the time of death, one is transferred into another material body. Therefore a life of
lusty desires and sense gratification is extremely risky.
9-18: Entangling materialistic family affairs
9. An attached householder with uncontrolled senses (ajitendriyaḥ), is bound strongly by ropes
of affection (sneha-pāśair dṛḍhair baddham) for his family and cannot be liberated.
Even if one realizes that he should worship Kṛṣṇa, he is unable to do so. Therefore from
the kaumāra age one should begin worshipping the Lord. One can perfect one’s worship
only by attachment to worship and detachment towards other things.
Training as a brahmacārī in the beginning of one’s life enables one to lead a proper
gṛhastha or householder life and progress towards spiritual realization.
10. Strength of material attachment: Who can give up desire for money (arthatṛṣṇāṁ), which
is dearer than one’s life? Thieves, servants and merchants try to get money even by risking their
lives.
11-13. Insatiable family attachments
Wife is kind and sympathetic and pleases her husband in a solitary place
Children talk sweet words, in broken language, which is pleasing to hear
Parents and one's children are very dear
Daughter is especially dear to her father, and is always in his mind.
Household furniture, domestic animals and servants give comfort.
Genitals and tongue bind one by material conditions
Unable to give up attachment to these things, the foolish householder, acting out of lust with
unsatisfied desires (lobha, avitṛpta kāma), perishes. He is just like a silkworm that is imprisoned
in its own cocoon, with no way to escape.
14-15. Absorption in family maintenance (kuṭumba-poṣa, kutumba-rāmaḥ) leads to –
i. exhaustion of lifespan
ii. defeat of the real purpose of human life (atha vihatam)
iii. no regret or distaste for enjoyment despite sufferings in material existence
iv. no sense control (ajitendriya)
v. unfulfilled desires (aśānta kāma)
vi. obsessed with accumulating money, even by stealing or cheating, despite knowing that one
will be punished now (by government) and after death (by Yamarāja).
Prahlāda Mahārāja has described earlier that the increasingly entangling family life
centered around sex life is like a dark well (See 7.5.5 and 7.9.45) and that one should give
it up to take shelter of the Supreme Lord.
16. Even the learned (vidvān) are overcome by ignorance like a fool (vimūḍha) and get
absorbed in family affairs, incapable of understanding oneself and get bewildered by the
separatist conceptions of ‘self and others’ (svīya-pārakya-vibhinna-bhāva).
17. Rarity of liberation: No one bereft of knowledge of the Supreme Lord has been able to
liberate oneself from material bondage at any time or anywhere. Addicted to sense gratification,
the demons become playthings in the hands of women (krīḍā-mṛga) and are shackled in the
expansions of family relationships.
Then what is the solution to come out of this family entanglement?
18. Solution: Although you are sons of demons, (i) keep aloof from the association of demons
and (ii) take shelter of Lord Nārāyaṇa, the origin of all devatās. Because the ultimate goal for the
devotees is liberation from material bondage.
19-26: INSTRUCTIONS ON WORSHIPING THE SUPREME LORD
19-24: Pleasing the Supreme Lord
19. Pleasing Lord Nārāyaṇa takes no great endeavor as He is the Supersoul in all beings, and
father of all. There is no impediment in worshiping Him in all directions, in all times and from
all angles of vision.
na hy acyutaṁ prīṇayato bahv-āyāso 'surātmajāḥ
ātmatvāt sarva-bhūtānāṁ siddhatvād iha sarvataḥ
One's duty is to revive one’s relationship with Nārāyaṇa by bhakti that constitutes
śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ etc. (See 7.5.23). A slight endeavor in this direction will make the
attempt successful, whereas one will never be successful in pleasing his so-called family,
society and nation, even if one endeavors to sacrifice his life.
Prahlāda’s friends, who were born of demon families, thought that realizing the Supreme Lord
was difficult. But the Lord is most intimately related to all jīvas and is present everywhere.
Therefore if one understands this Vaiṣṇava philosophy, realize Him is not at all difficult.
20-21. The infallible Supreme Lord is present everywhere – in all higher and lower beings
from Brahmā to non-moving beings, in all material elements, in the mahattattva (total material
energy), in the three modes, in the unmanifested material nature and the false ego. Although He
is one, He is all-pervading.
22-23. Other qualities of the Lord: He is the all-pervading Supersoul, cause of all causes,
observer in the hearts of all living entities, changeless and undivided. He is perceived as the
supreme sac-cid-ānanda [eternity, knowledge and bliss]. Being covered by the curtain of māyā,
He appears non-existent to the atheist.
When māyā is overcome by bhakti to the Supreme Lord, the Lord becomes visible
according to the degree of bhakti.
Since the Lord can be realized by bhakti, bhakti should be made steady, without obstacles, by
showing mercy and friendship to all beings.
24. Pleasing the Lord by being merciful to all
tasmāt sarveṣu bhūteṣu dayāṁ kuruta Therefore show compassion and affection to all living
sauhṛdam               beings and be their well-wishers.
bhāvam āsuram unmucya         And please give up your demoniac nature.
yayā tuṣyaty adhokṣajaḥ       Thus the Supreme Lord will be satisfied.
If the Lord is satisfied, what is use of other goals of aspiration? The devotees are like bees,
who by their nature do not desire other things.
25-26: Surrendering unto the Lord and its result
25. Nothing is unobtainable if the Lord is satisfied. He is unlimited and the cause of all causes.
Since the devotees glorify the lotus feet of the Lord, for them, what is the use of dharma, artha,
kāma and mokṣa, which are all automatically obtainable under the influence of material modes?
Hearing this from Prahlāda, his schoolmates might ask, “If dharma, artha and kāma are not
the goals of human life, why have the two sons of Śukrācārya said these are prescribed in the
Vedas?” Prahlāda says, “I do not criticize them, since they are approved for some persons. What
is actually beneficial for the saintly (satyam) is surrender to the Supreme Lord.”
26. Surrender to Viṣṇu’s lotus feet is transcendental. I consider the other process within the tri-
vargas (dharma, artha and kāma), namely education, rituals, logic, law and order and means of
earning livelihood etc., to be external and material.
To give the boys faith, Prahlāda explains the guru sampradāya.
27. Lord Nārāyaṇa gave this pure knowledge (jñānaṁ amalaṁ) to Nārada Muni earlier. This
can be understood by fully surrendered devotees (ekāntināṁ) with no material desires
(akiñcanānāṁ), who bathe their bodies in the dust from the Lord’s lotus feet (pādāravinda-
rajasāpluta-dehināṁ). They understand this in paramparā.
28. I received this knowledge of bhāgavata-dharma from Nārada Muni. This is fully scientific
and based on logic and philosophy, and is free from material contamination.
29-30. Prahlāda’s schoolmates asked him, “We have only Śaṇḍa and Amarka, as our teachers.
We are dependent on them and especially you always live with in palace! How then did you hear
from Nārada Muni?”
7.7 WHAT PRAHLĀDA LEARNED IN THE WOMB
To answer his schoolmates, Prahlāda relates how he had acquired spiritual knowledge from
Nārada Muni when he was in the womb of his mother.
1-17: EVENTS LEADING TO KAYĀDHU’S STAY AT NĀRADA MUNI’S ĀŚRAMA
1. Prahlāda remembered the words of Nārada Muni and spoke to his friends as follows:
2-5. The devatās attack the demons: When my father Hiraṇyakaśipu went to perform
austerities, the devatās attacked the demons thinking, “Hiraṇyakaśipu is now defeated by his own
sinful reactions just as a serpent is eaten by small ants.” Seeing the devatās killing the leaders of
the demons, other demons left their homes and relatives and fled to protect their lives.
6-7. Indra arrests Kayādhu: The devatās plundered Hiraṇyakaśipu’s palace and Indra arrested
his queen Kayādhu. When she was being led away, crying like a kurarī bird captured by a
vulture, Nārada Muni appeared there and saw her.
8. Nārada stops Indra, “This woman is sinless and chaste wife of another man. You should not
drag her off in this merciless way. Release her immediately.”
9. Indra told his plan to Nārada, “She is carrying the seed of the great demon. Let her remain
in our custody until her child is delivered, and then we shall release her.”
Indra’s plan was to kill the child as soon as he was born. He expected the child to be
another great demon like his father Hiraṇyakaśipu.
10-11. Nārada said about the child, “The child in her womb is sinless (niṣkilbiṣaḥ), a great
devotee (mahā-bhāgavata) and a powerful servant of Lord Viṣṇu. You will not be able to kill
him.” Hearing this, the devatās released my mother and circumambulated her (to offer respects to
the devotee within her womb).
Obedience to paramparā: Although the devatās are exalted, they were obedient to
Nārada Muni and accepted his authoritative statements. This is called understanding by the
paramparā system. There is no need to speculate about God and His devotee. One should
just accept the statements of a bona fide devotee.
12-14. Later Nārada Muni brought her to his āśrama and told her to remain there until her
husband comes back from his asuterities. Thus my mother stayed there under Nārada Muni’s
care without fear. She desired to give birth after the arrival of her husband. At the āśrama she
rendered service unto Nārada Muni with great devotion.
15. Merciful Nārada instructed both the mother and the child in her womb. These instructions
on religion and transcendental knowledge (dharmasya tattvaṁ jñānaṁ ca) were free from all
material contamination (nirmalam).
The words ‘nirmalam’ ‘dharma,’ refer to spotless religion i.e., bhāgavata-dharma or pure
bhakti-yoga. Ordinary ritualistic activities constitute contaminated religion.
Prahlāda’s schoolmates might ask him, “But why don’t we see bhakti in your mother?”
16. The mother forgot the instructions because of the long duration of time that has passed and
because of her being a woman; but due to the blessings of Nārada Muni, I could not forget them.
Prahlāda’s mother was more concerned with protecting the child in the womb and was
very anxious to see her husband return. Therefore she could not consider very seriously
the sublime instructions of Nārada Muni.
17. If you put faith in my words, you can also understand spiritual knowledge like me,
although you are children. Women also can understand.
One cannot imagine how a baby in embryo could hear Nārada Muni. But progress in
spiritual life and reception of spiritual knowledge cannot be obstructed by any material
condition. This is called ahaituky apratihatā. Prahlāda’s speaking of spiritual knowledge
to his classmates was also certainly effective, although all of them were children.
18-28: JÑĀNA – KNOWLEDGE OF SPIRIT SOUL AND TRANSMIGRATION
18-24: The nature of the spirit soul
18. Soul doesn’t undergo any changes but the body undergoes six changes, namely birth,
existence, growth, transformation, dwindling and death, just as fruits and flowers of tree undergo
changes.
19-20. Twelve qualities of ātmā (Supersoul or soul)
i. Eternal, without birth or death (nitya)
ii. Free from deterioration (avyaya)
iii. Pure, without material contamination (śuddha)
iv. Individual (eka)
v. Knower of body (kṣetra-jña)
vi. Shelter of everything (āśraya)
vii. Free from material change (avikriya)
viii. Self-illuminated (sva-dṛk)
ix. Cause of all causes (hetu)
x. All-pervading/ spreading throughout body as consciousness (vyāpaka)
xi. Independent of material body (asaṅgī)
xii. Always uncovered (anāvṛtaḥ)
With these transcendental qualities, a learned person must give up the false conception (asat-
bhāvam) of ‘I and mine’ (aham-mama), born of illusion (moha-jam).
Who can know the existence of the spirit within the body?
21. Understanding spirit: Just as an expert geologist can extract gold from gold ore, a
spiritually advanced person (adhyātma-vit) can attain perfection in spiritual life and understand
the soul and Supersoul within the body by spiritual processes (ātmayogaiḥ).
The above verse spoke about knower of ādhyātma. The next verse says what is adhyātma.
22. The soul exists as observer within the 8 energies, 3 modes and 16 transformations.
The 8 external energies are prakṛti, mahat-tattva, false ego and the five sense objects.
The 3 modes of material nature are goodness, passion and ignorance.
The 16 transformations are the eleven senses and five gross elements (earth, water etc).
23. The two kinds of bodies of the individual soul are – (i) a gross body made of five gross
elements and (ii) a subtle body made of three subtle elements. By analysis, one must separate
spirit from matter.
24. A sober person must search for the soul with mind purified through analytical study of the
soul's connection with (anvaya) and distinction from (vyatireka) all things that undergo creation,
maintenance and destruction.
25-28: Destroying the polluted material intelligence
25. Intelligence has three states of activity—wakefulness (jāgaraṇaṁ), dreaming (svapna) and
deep sleep (suṣupti). The person who perceives all these three states is the original master,
Paramātmā, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
He who activates that material intelligence is the Paramātmā. He who is endowed with the
intelligence is the jīva, who is beyond the various states of intelligence.
26. One can understand the pure soul by rejecting these three states of intelligence composed
of the three material modes, just as one can understand the presence of the air by the aromas it
carries.
The soul is only the observer of the three states of intelligence. The activities of the body
are not the activities of the soul, just as aromas are distinct from air, the material vehicle in
which they are carried.
27. Polluted intelligence entangles the jīva in material life and three modes. Its root is not
understood (ajñāna-mūlaḥ). Though insubstantial (apārthaḥ), it imposes the body on the jīva
(saṁsāra), just as a dream is imposed on a person.
One can destroy this polluted intelligence by devotional service unto Lord Kṛṣṇa.
28. Destroy this material intelligence by Kṛṣṇa consciousness that can – (i) burn the seed of
fruitive activities, (ii) stop the flow of the intelligence in three states and (iii) dissipate the
ignorance.
Having described the nature of spirit soul and its entanglement in material existence due to the
gross and subtle bodies, Prahlāda will now describe in detail the process of coming out of this
entanglement – i.e., devotional service unto the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa.
29-38: PRAHLĀDA’S INSTRUCTIONS ON BHAKTI
29-33: The activities and results of bhakti
29. Bhakti is the best of all paths recommended for disentanglement from matter. It is directly
spoken by the Supreme Lord and is the easiest way of developing love of God.
tatropāya-sahasrāṇām ayaṁ bhagavatoditaḥ
yad īśvare bhagavati yathā yair añjasā ratiḥ
30-32. Various activities of bhakti
i       guru-śuśrūṣayā bhaktyā     Serving a bona fide guru with faith and devotion.
ii     sarva-labdhārpaṇena ca     Offer all one’s possession to guru or Kṛṣṇa.
iii   saṅgena sādhu-bhaktānām      Associating with saintly persons and devotees.
iv        īśvarārādhanena ca       Worshiping the Supreme Lord.
v    śraddhayā tat-kathāyāṁ ca    Hearing the glories of the Lord with faith.
vi     kīrtanair guṇa-karmaṇām     Glorifying the Lord’s divine qualities and activities.
vii     tat-pādāmburuha-dhyānāt Always meditating on the Lord's lotus feet.
viii      tal-liṅgekṣārhaṇādibhiḥ Worshiping the Lord’s Deity according to the injunctions
of the śāstra and guru.
ix        hariḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu  Remember the Lord as the Paramātmā situated in the
bhagavān āsta īśvaraḥ core of every living entity's heart.
x      iti bhūtāni manasā kāmais Respecting all living entities according to their position
taiḥ sādhu mānayet   or manifestation.
By performing the above activities of bhakti one can attain the following results.
33. Results of bhakti activities
i. Secondary result: One can cut down the influence of lust, anger, greed, illusion, madness and
jealousy (nirjita-ṣaḍ-vargaiḥ).
ii. Primary result: One attains the platform of rati or loving service to Lord Vāsudeva
(saṁlabhyate ratiḥ).
The next verse describes the symptoms of rati.
34-38: Advanced stages of bhakti
34-35. Symptoms of rati: Upon hearing about the incomparable (atulyān) qualities and pastimes
of the Lord, the devotee becomes choked up, his hairs stand on end, his voice falters, his eyes
shed tears, and he sings, shouts and dances. As if haunted by a ghost (graha-grasta), he laughs
and cries. He meditates, contemplates, offers respects to all, breathes heavily, gives up shame
and shouts like a madman, “Hare Kṛṣṇa! O Nārāyaṇa! O master of the universe!”
36. Attaining particular bhāva: By constantly thinking of the Lord, the devotee is freed from
all material bondage (mukta-samasta-bandhana). The seeds of his material desires are burnt to
ashes (nirdagdha-bījānuśayo). By such bhakti (rāga-bhakti) one achieves the shelter of the Lord
and directly contacts Him.
37. Direct contact with the Lord by bhakti destroys the cycle of saṁsāra (repeated birth and
death) for the embodied souls. Therefore worship the Lord in your heart.
38. Worshiping the Lord is easy. He is in everyone’s heart, and is the friend of all jīvas. What,
then, is the need for unnecessary endeavour for sense gratification?
Having emphasized the glory of performing devotional service unto the Supreme Lord,
Prahlāda will now describe the worthlessness of material pursuits, that act as obstacles in bhakti.
39-47: STRUGGLE FOR MATERIAL THINGS IS UNWORTHY
39-42: The transient nature of material happiness
39. Material opulence is temporary. How much pleasure can ephemeral riches, wife, animals,
children, residence and other luxuries offer to a human being with life span that is perishable in a
moment (kṣaṇa-bhaṅgura āyuṣaḥ)?
rāyaḥ kalatraṁ paśavaḥ sutādayo
gṛhā mahī kuñjara-kośa-bhūtayaḥ
sarve 'rtha-kāmāḥ kṣaṇa-bhaṅgurāyuṣaḥ
kurvanti martyasya kiyat priyaṁ calāḥ
40a. Even heaven is temporary. By sacrifices one may be elevated to heavenly planets, but they
are also impure and not free from the taint of material existence.
40b. So, worship the Supreme Lord with great devotion for your own benefit and self-
realization. He is free from all inebrieties.
41. A materialist (karmī) is frustrated in his attempts to attain better enjoyment. Although he
thinks of himself highly learned, he inevitably gets opposite results.
How then are the materialists happy sometimes?
42. The happiness and distress of karmīs
sukhāya duḥkha-mokṣāya saṅkalpa In this world, every materialist desires and acts to
iha karmiṇaḥ         achieve happiness and diminish distress.
sadāpnotīhayā duḥkham      But they achieve only unhappiness by their actions.
anīhāyāḥ sukhāvṛtaḥ      By giving up desire for enjoyment, they get happiness.
43-47: The material body, its possessions and relations
43. Comfort seeking body: A living entity desires and acts for comfort of one’s body. But the
perishable body, which is property of others, embraces the jīva and leaves him aside.
kāmān kāmayate kāmyair yad-artham iha pūruṣaḥ
sa vai dehas tu pārakyo bhaṅguro yāty upaiti ca
The material body is meant to be eaten by dogs, jackals or moths and thus turned into
useless stool, ashes or earth. The living entity wastes his time in a futile attempt to gain
material possessions for the comfort of one body after another.
44. False bodily possessions: As the body itself is meant to become stool or earth, there is no
meaning to the paraphernalia related to the body, such as wife, children, servants, residences and
so on.
45. Perishable bodily relations: Relation with this paraphernalia is finished when the body is
finished. For a devotee who experiences an ocean of eternal bliss in worshiping the Lord
(nityānanda-rasodadheḥ), bodily relations are most insignificant.
46. Karma causes bodies: The living entity receives different material bodies due to one’s
previous fruitive activities (karma) and thus suffers. Knowing this, who will be interested in
fruitive acts that result in miseries?
47. Cycle of transmigration: The jīva receives one type of body as per his karma and by
performing actions with that body he creates another body. Thus one continues in the cycle of
birth and death.
48. Depend on the Supreme Lord with devotion and without material desires (anīha). He is the
shelter of dharma, artha and kāma.
49. Lord Hari is the Supersoul (ātma) of all jīvas. Every one is manifestation of His energy. He
is the supreme controller (īśvara) and most dear (priya) to all.
50. Most auspicious condition of life (svastimān) is to be situated in the service of Lord
Mukunda (bhajan mukunda-caraṇaṁ) like me (Prahlāda). This can be done by anyone including
devatās, demons, humans, Yakṣas, Gandharvas and so on.
Without bhakti, everything else is mockery.
51-52. One cannot please Lord Mukunda by being a brāhmaṇa, devatā, sage, or by good
conduct, learning, charity, austerity, sacrifice, cleanliness or vows. He is pleased only by
unflinching, unalloyed, sincere devotion to Him (amalayā bhaktyā).
nālaṁ dvijatvaṁ devatvam ṛṣitvaṁ vāsurātmajāḥ
prīṇanāya mukundasya na vṛttaṁ na bahu-jñatā
na dānaṁ na tapo nejyā na śaucaṁ na vratāni ca
prīyate 'malayā bhaktyā harir anyad viḍambanam
53. Therefore take to bhakti to satisfy the Supreme Lord, the Supersoul of all
(sarvabhūtātmanīśvare), in the same favorable way as one takes care of oneself
(ātmaupamyena).
Bhakti does not depend on good birth.
54. Everyone can perform bhakti. The Yakṣas, Rākṣasas, women, śūdras, cowherd men, birds,
animals and sinful living entities can revive their original, eternal spiritual existence by accepting
the principles of bhakti-yoga.
55. The ultimate goal of human life as explained by all the scriptures is to – (i) render service
to the lotus feet of Govinda, and (ii) to see Him everywhere.
etāvān eva loke 'smin puṁsaḥ svārthaḥ paraḥ smṛtaḥ
ekānta-bhaktir govinde yat sarvatra tad-īkṣaṇam
7.8 LORD NṚSIṀHA-DEVA SLAYS THE KING OF
DEMONS
Prahlāda’s instructions to his schoolmates about bhakti became effective and they rejected
their teachers Śaṇḍa and Amarka. Hiraṇyakaśipu becomes angry at Prahlāda.
1-13: CONVERSATION BETWEEN PRAHLĀDA AND HIRAṆYAKAŚIPU
1-6: Prahlāda’s effective preaching and Hiraṇyakaśipu’s anger
1. The sons of the demons appreciated and accepted Prahlāda’s instructions seriously, and
rejected the instructions (on diplomacy, politics etc) of their so-called teachers Śaṇḍa and
Amarka.
Effective preaching: When a pure devotee (Prahlāda) preaches the glories of the Lord
following the footsteps of another pure devotee (Nārada Muni), his preaching is effective.
2. The teachers saw that the boys were becoming fixed in bhakti-yoga, they were afraid and
reported to Hiraṇyakaśipu.
By associating with a pure devotee and following his instructions, one becomes fixed in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness and is not disturbed by materialistic consciousness.
3-4. Hiraṇyakaśipu became angry and decided to kill Prahlāda. Hissing like a trampled snake,
he spoke to Prahlāda who was peaceful, mild and gentle, his senses controlled, stood with folded
hands.
When one is impudent toward a highly authorized devotee, one is punished by the laws of
nature and loses his life span, blessings and the results of pious activities (See SB 10.4.46).
5-6. Hiraṇyakaśipu rebuked Prahlāda, “O most impudent (durvinīta), unintelligent
(mandātman), disruptor of the family (kula-bheda-kara), lowest of men (adhama), obstinate
(stabdham), you have violated my power. Today I shall send you to the abode of Yamarāja
(yama-kṣayam). When I am angry all the planets tremble. Then by whose power are you so
fearless?”
Positive meanings of Hiraṇyakaśipu’s abusive words towards Prahlāda
Durvinīta → well-behaved, or merciful towards the rascals.
Mandātman → one who is kind to the unfortunate, as he can’t tolerate their suffering.
Kula-bheda-kara → one who brings distinction to the family.
Adhama → Prahlāda, like the Prajāpatis, has great power.
Stabdham → Prahlāda does not consider the demons worthy of worship.
Yama-kṣayam → The abode for yoga which enables Prahlāda to survive.
7-10: Prahlāda glorifies the Lord and advises his father
7. The Lord is the source of everyone’s strength
na kevalaṁ me bhavataś ca rājan sa vai balaṁ Dear King, not only the source of my strength,
balināṁ cāpareṣām                the source of your strength and strength of
everyone else who is strong, is the Supreme
Lord.
pare 'vare 'mī sthira-jaṅgamā ye brahmādayo Whether moving or non-moving, superior or
yena vaśaṁ praṇītāḥ            inferior, everyone, including Brahmā, is
controlled by His strength.
8. That Supreme Lord is the supreme controller (īśvara), time factor (kāla), the power of the
senses, mind, body and vital force, the best of all living entities, the master of three modes and
the creator, maintainer and destroyer of this cosmic manifestation.
9. Give up your demoniac mentality (āsuram bhāvam) of discriminating between enemies and
friends. Uncontrolled mind (ajitād ātmanaḥ) is the only enemy in world. In platform of equality
(samaṁ), one can worship the Lord perfectly.
Mind control and bhakti: The only bona fide process for controlling the mind is to fix
the mind by service to the Lord. We create enemies and friends according to the dictation
of the mind, but actually there are no enemies and friends. To understand this is the
preliminary condition for entering into the kingdom of devotional service.
10. Enemies are merely imagined due to ignorance. One will have no enemies if one controls
the mind and senses, conquers the six plunderers within (lust, anger, greed, illusion, madness and
jealousy) and is equiposed to all living entities.
If good instructions are given to a fool, he does not take advantage of them, but becomes more
angry. Prahlāda’s authorized instructions were not accepted by Hiraṇyakaśipu, who was
interested only in money and women. (hiraṇya means gold, and kaśipu refers to good bedding.)
Thus he responded with anger as follows.
11-13: Śrī Hiraṇyakaśipu threatens to kill Prahlāda
Although Hiraṇyakaśipu was a demon, he is described here by the added word śrī.
Because he fortunately had a great devotee son as Prahlāda. Thus although he was a
demon, he would attain salvation and return home, back to Godhead.
11. Desirous of death in my hands, you are speaking confused words (viklavāḥ giraḥ) and
boasting as if you were better than me at controlling senses, O fool (mandātman)!
12. Where is Your Lord? O unfortunate Prahlāda, you always described a Supreme Being who
is above everything, controller of everyone, and all-pervading. If He is everywhere, then why is
He not present before me in this pillar?
Hiraṇyakaśipu thought himself fortunate as he possessed the property of universe. He
called Prahlāda ‘unfortunate’ because although, as his legitimate son, Prahlāda was to
inherit this property, because of his impudence, he was going to die at his father’s hands.
In all circumstances a devotee can see the Lord everywhere, whereas the nondevotee can’t.
13. I shall now sever your head. Let me see, how your most worshipable God come to protect
you.
14-22: APPEARANCE OF LORD NṚSIṀHA-DEVA
14. Striking the pillar: Hiraṇyakaśipu then took up his sword, got up from his royal throne and
obsessed with anger he struck his fist against the column.
15-16. From the pillar came a fearful sound, which appeared to crack the covering of the
universe. It reached even Brahmaloka and the devatās thought, “Oh, now our planets are being
destroyed!” Hiraṇyakaśipu heard that sound, that had never been heard before. Other leaders of
the demons were afraid and no one could find its origin.
17. The Lord proves His devotees’ words true
satyaṁ vidhātuṁ nija-bhṛtya-bhāṣitaṁ To prove that the statement of His servant
Prahlāda true
vyāptiṁ ca bhūteṣv akhileṣu cātmanaḥ       that the Lord is present everywhere, in all
living entities and elements,
adṛśyatātyadbhuta-rūpam udvahan          Lord Hari appeared in a most wonderful form
that was never seen before,
stambhe sabhāyāṁ na mṛgaṁ na mānuṣam         from the pillar in the assembly. That form was
neither that of a man nor that of a lion.
Prahlāda had said that the Lord was present everywhere, even in the pillar.
Hiraṇyakaśipu (formerly Jaya, the doorkeeper of Lord Viṣṇu in Vaikuṇṭha) had prayed
not to die from created being, inside or outside a residence, and not by man or beast
(7.3.35-37). Also he thought, “I may die because of my hatred of Prahlāda.” (7.5.47)
Brahmā had sanctioned the desires of Hiraṇyakaśipu (7.4.1-2).
Nārada Muni told that the child in Kayadhu’s womb cannot be killed. (7.7.10)
18. Hiraṇyakaśipu was astonished to see the Lord emerging from the pillar. He thought, “What
is this creature that is half man and half lion?”
Hiraṇyakaśipu never thought that an animal and human being would be combined so that
demons like him would be puzzled by such a form. This is the meaning of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead's omnipotence.
19-22. Fearsome features of Lord Nṛsiṁha: Hiraṇyakaśipu studied the Lord’s form –
Angry eyes resembling molten gold
Shining mane, which expanded the dimensions of His fearful face
Deadly teeth and Razor-sharp tongue, which moved about like a dueling sword
Ears erect and motionless
Nostrils and gaping mouth that appeared like mountain caves
Parted jaws, thick and short neck, broad chest, thin waist
Entire body touching the sky
Bodily hairs as white as the rays of the moon
Arms like flanks of soldiers, spread in all directions killing the demons
23-33: LORD NṚSIṀHA-DEVA KILLS HIRAṆYAKAŚIPU AND THE DEMONS
23. Hiraṇyakaśipu attacked Lord Nṛsiṁha with his club thinking, “Lord Viṣṇu has made this
plan to kill me, but what is the use? Who can fight with me?”
Lion Vs. elephant: Here Lord Nṛsiṁha appeared like a lion, and Hiraṇyakaśipu attacked
Him like an elephant. Therefore this comparison is appropriate, because in the jungle
sometimes lions and elephants fight and generally the elephant is defeated by the lion.
24. Hiraṇyakaśipu became invisible within the Lord’s effulgence, just as an insect falls into a
fire and becomes invisible. This is not astonishing, because the Lord, who is in pure goodness,
formerly entered and illuminated the dark universe.
Dissipating darkness: Brahmā saw only darkness in the universe when he was born, but
when he received knowledge from the Lord, everything became clear. As long as we are in
material modes in this world, we are in darkness. This darkness can only be dissipated by
the presence of the Supreme Lord, which is invoked by the practice of bhakti-yoga.
Bhakti-yoga: The Lord appeared because of the bhakti-yoga of Prahlāda, and as soon as
He appeared, the influence of Hiraṇyakaśipu's passion and ignorance was vanquished as
the Lord's pure goodness, or the Brahman effulgence.
25-26. The Lord captured Hiraṇyakaśipu along with his club, and then gave him a chance to
slip from His hands, just as Garuḍa plays with a snake. But the devatās who were hiding behind
the clouds didn’t consider it very good.
The devatās knew that if Hiraṇyakaśipu escapes death and sees that the devatās were
looking forward for his death, he would take revenge on them. The devatās thought,
“Hiraṇyakaśipu has taken our homes. Now, if he lives, he will take our lives!”
27. Hiraṇyakaśipu falsely thought that the Lord was afraid of his prowess. After a while, he
again attacked Lord with sword and shield.
28. Laughing loudly the Lord captured Hiraṇyakaśipu. With the speed of a hawk, Hiraṇyakaśipu
moved everywhere, but with eyes closed due to fear.
29. Hiraṇyakaśipu’s death: Lord Nṛsiṁha captured Hiraṇyakaśipu, just as a snake captures a
mouse or Garuḍa captures a snake. The Lord placed the demon on His lap, in the doorway and
easily tore him to pieces with His nails, though his body couldn’t be pierced by thunderbolt.
To keep the promise of Brahmā intact, Nṛsiṁha-deva killed Hiraṇyakaśipu in this way:
He pierced him at the door, which was not in the assembly hall, nor outside.
He placed him on his lap, which which was neither land nor sky.
He pierced him by his nails, which were neither living nor dead, nor weapons.
He killed him during the twilight, which was neither day nor night.
30. Lord Nṛsiṁha’s condition after killing Hiraṇyakaśipu
Mouth and mane sprinkled with blood
Fierce eyes impossible to look at
Licking the edge of His mouth with His tongue
Decorated with a garland of the demon’s intestines
Resembled a lion that has just killed an elephant
31. Killing the demons: The Lord uprooted Hiraṇyakaśipu’s heart and threw it aside. He then
killed the other demons who came to attack, merely with the ends of His nails.
Lord Nṛsiṁha pulled out Hiraṇyakaśipu’s heart with His nails as if to inspect it. He
thought, “I was living happily in his heart, but how did this unfortunate person make anger
and hatred live there as well?”
32-33. The unparalleled prowess of Lord Nṛsiṁha-deva
His hair on His head – shook the clouds and scattered
His glaring eyes – stole the effulgence of luminaries
His breathing – agitated the seas and oceans
His roaring – made all the elephants to cry in fear
His hair – threw the airplanes into outer space
His lotus feet – made earth appear to slip, and all the mountains sprang up
His effulgence – diminished the natural illumination of the sky and directions
34-39: THE DEVATĀS CELEBRATE LORD NṚSIṀHA’S VICTORY
34. Lord Nṛsiṁha sat on Hiraṇyakaśipu’s throne seeing no contestant to face His power.
Because of fear and obedience, no one could come forward (i.e., all the demons immediately
accepted the Lord’s supremacy).
A devotee is always glorious: By sitting on the throne, the Lord showed who should be
the king. Although He does not accept the seat offered by sages, purified by mantras, He
accepted a throne already used and not offered to him, because it belonged to His devotee
gatekeeper Jaya, even though he had been cursed and took on the nature of a demon. By
this the Lord showed that His devotee is fortunate in any condition of his life.
35. Hiraṇyakaśipu was like fever of meningitis for three worlds. At his death, the wives of the
devatās repeatedly showered flowers on Lord Nṛsiṁha, in great joy.
36. The sky was crowded with the airplanes of the devatās, who began beating drums and
kettledrums. The heavenly women danced and the Gandharvas sang sweetly.
37-39. All the devatās and sages offered respects to Lord Nṛsiṁha. Brahmā, Śiva, Indra, Pitṛs,
Siddhas, Vidyādharas, Nāgas, Gandharvas, Apsaras and many others came.
40. Lord Brahmā: “You possess unlimited potencies that no one can estimate. You easily
create, maintain and destroy the universe, yet You remain the same.”
41. Lord Śiva: “Your anger is for the end of the universe. As the demon has been killed now,
please protect his son Prahlāda Mahārāja, Your surrendered devotee.”
42. King Indra: “This demon has taken our shares in sacrifice, which are Yours. He has
overtaken our hearts, which are Your residence. Now Your presence dissipated the darkness in
our hearts. Your servants do not care even for liberation.”
43. The sages: “The process of austerity, with which You create this universe, was stopped by
this demon. O protector of the surrendered (śaraṇya-pāla), now You have killed him and
approved the process of austerity.”
44. Pitṛs: “O protector of all religious principles (akhila-dharma-goptre), this demon enjoyed all
the offerings of śrāddha ceremonies done by our descendants. By killing him, You have taken
back all this stolen property from his abdomen.”
45. Siddhas: “This dishonest demon took our natural mystic powers, and became proud. Now,
that he has been killed by Your nails, we offer our obeisances unto You.”
46. Vidyādharas: “Proud Hiraṇyakaśipu has banned our power to appear and disappear. Now
that he has been killed, we eternally offer obeisances to the pastime form of Lord Nṛsiṁha-
deva.”
47. Nāgas: “Sinful Hiraṇyakaśipu took away our jewels and our wives. Now, You are the source
of all pleasure to our wives. We together offer You obeisances.”
48. Manus: “Due to the demon, our laws for maintaining varṇāśrama-dharma were destroyed.
Now that You have killed this great demon, we are in our normal condition. Kindly instruct us,
Your eternal servants.”
49. Prajāpatis: “This demon forbade us to create any more good progeny. Now he is lying dead.
Let us offer obeisances unto You, whose incarnation is meant for the welfare of the entire
universe.”
50. Gandharvas: “Our singing and dancing is meant to please You. But this demon has made us
to dance and sing for him. Now he got a low condition, the activities of such an upstart cannot
have any benefit.”
51. Cāraṇas: “As You have destroyed the demon, we are now relieved, and we eternally take
shelter of Your lotus feet, which award liberation from material world.”
52. Yakṣas: “Even though we are Your best servants, this demon engaged us as palanquin
carriers. But now You have killed this demon who is a trouble to everyone.”
53. Kimpuruṣas: “We are insignificant and cannot offer suitable prayers unto You, the Supreme
Lord. When devotees got disgusted by this demon, You killed him.”
54. Vaitālikas: “This demon usurped our position of chanting Your spotless glories in great
assemblies. Now, You made us fortunate by killing this sinful demon who was like a chronic
disease.”
55. Kinnaras: “Even though we are Your ever-existing servants, this demon engaged us in his
service without remuneration. Now You killed him. Please continue to be our patron.”
56. Associates of Lord Viṣṇu: “Your wonderful form is meant for the good fortune of all
worlds. This Hiraṇyakaśipu was the same Jaya (Your doorkeeper), who was cursed by
brāhmaṇas. We understand that his killing is Your special mercy upon him.”
7.9 PRAHLĀDA PACIFIES LORD NṚSIṀHA-DEVA
WITH PRAYERS
When the devatās failed to appease Lord Nṛsiṁha, Prahlāda pacifies Him with
prayers.
1. The devatās dared not to approach Lord Nṛsiṁha-deva at that time because He
was absorbed in the mood of anger.
2. Even Lakṣmī couldn’t approach the Lord even though requested by the devatās,
saying that she had never seen such an astonishing (mahad adbhutam) form before.
Influence of līlā-śaktī: The Lord has unlimited eternal forms in Vaikuṇṭha and Lakṣmī
had certainly seen Nṛsiṁha in some previous kalpa. Her impression of not having
previously seen or heard about this form is inspired by līlā-śakti or the Lord’s pastime
potency, in order to make everyone taste adbhuta-rasa, the mood of astonishment.
Lord Nṛsiṁha’s anger couldn’t be pacfied by Brahmā, Śiva and even Lakṣmī,
because the Lord wanted to exhibit His affection for Prahlāda and give him the
opportunity to pacify Him.
3. Brahmā requested Prahlāda to go forward and appease the angry Lord Nṛsiṁha.
4. Little Prahlāda proceeded toward the Lord and fell at His feet to offer obeisances.
5. Lord Nṛsiṁha-deva’s ecstatic affection for Prahlāda
sva-pāda-mūle patitaṁ tam arbhakaṁ    When the small boy Prahlāda prostrated atthe
soles of His lotus feet
vilokya devaḥ kṛpayā pariplutaḥ    Lord Nṛsiṁha-deva saw him and became
overwhelmed with affection for him
utthāpya tac-chīrṣṇy adadhāt karāmbujaṁ Raising Prahlāda, the Lord placed His lotus
hand upon the boy's head, because
kālāhi-vitrasta-dhiyāṁ kṛtābhayam       His hand creates fearlessness to those whose
minds are afraid of the snake of time
6. Prahlāda’s symptoms of ecstasy
sa tat-kara-sparśa-dhutākhilāśubhaḥ     By the touch of Lord’s hand, Prahlāda was
completely freed of all material contamination.
sapady abhivyakta-parātma-darśanaḥ       He immediately manifested realization of the
Supreme Soul.
tat-pāda-padmaṁ hṛdi nirvṛto dadhau      In transcendental bliss, He captured the Lord’s
lotus feet within the core of his heart.
hṛṣyat-tanuḥ klinna-hṛd-aśru-locanaḥ     His body showed ecstatic symptoms, his heart
was softened with love, and his eyes with tears.
7. Prahlāda’s mood in beginning prayers
astauṣīd dharim ekāgra- manasā Prahlāda began his prayers to Hari with focussed mind
susamāhitaḥ          and full attention
prema-gadgadayā vācā      with love and in a faltering voice
tan-nyasta-hṛdayekṣaṇaḥ    by fixing his heart and sight on Lord Nṛsiṁha.
8-50: PRAYERS OF PRAHLĀDA MAHĀRĀJA
8-12: Prahlāda prepares himself to offer prayers
8. How can I satisfy You when devas and munis failed?
brahmādayaḥ sura-gaṇā munayo 'tha Great devatās headed by Brahmā, great sages and
siddhāḥ            perfected beings
sattvaikatāna-gatayo vacasāṁ  who are immersed in mode of goodness, and who praised
pravāhaiḥ           with streams of excellent words
nārādhituṁ puru-guṇair adhunāpi could not satisfy the Lord up till now, although they all
pipruḥ            are well qualified.
How is it possible for me, who have been born in a
kiṁ toṣṭum arhati sa me harir ugra- family of demons, to offer suitable prayers to satisfy
jāteḥ                 Him?
Having said that sattva (mode of goodness) and vacasāṁ pravāha (eloquent praises)
are not sufficient to please the Lord, Prahlāda will enumerate other external
qualifications by which one cannot satisfy the Lord. Only bhakti can please Him.
9. No material qualification can satisfy You, only bhakti can
manye dhanābhijanarūpa-tapaḥ- I consider – (i) wealth (ii) an aristocratic family (iii)
śrutaujas-             beauty (iv) austerity (v) education (vi) sensory expertise
tejaḥ-prabhāva-balapauruṣa-buddhi- (vii) lustre (viii) influence (ix) physical strength (x)
yogāḥ                diligence (xi) intelligence and (xii) mystic yogic power
nārādhanāya hi bhavanti parasya – not as qualifications by which one cannot satisfy the
puṁso                Supreme Personality of Godhead.
bhaktyā tutoṣa bhagavān gaja-yūtha- One can satisfy Him simply by devotional service. He
pāya                was satisfied by Gajendra, king of elephants, who had
devotion.
10. A low-born devotee is better than a brāhmaṇa nondevotee
viprād dvi-ṣaḍ-guṇa-yutād aravinda- If a brāhmaṇa has all the twelve brahminical
nābha- pādāravinda-vimukhāt     qualifications6 (or the twelve qualities mentioned in the
śvapacaṁ variṣṭham          previous verse), but is averse to the lotus feet of the
lotus-naveled Lord, he is certainly lower than a devotee
who is a dog-eater.
manye tad-arpita-          I consider that devotee, who has dedicated his mind,
manovacanehitārtha-         words, activities, wealth and life to the Lord, to be better.
prāṇaṁ punāti sa kulaṁ na tu    Such a devotee can purify his whole family, whereas the
bhūrimānaḥ              so-called brāhmaṇa cannot purify even himself.
Hearing Prahlāda say that one who has dedicated everthing to the Lord is great, the
Lord might question him, “Am I self-centered, because I am pleased with bhakti unto
Me and not with others?” Anticipating such a question Prahlāda speaks –
11. Our offerings are for our benefit, not Yours
naivātmanaḥ prabhur ayaṁ nija- The offerings made to the Lord are not meant for His
lābha-pūrṇo            own benefit as He is always fully satisfied in Himself.
mānaṁ janād aviduṣaḥ karuṇo vṛṇīte The Lord mercifully accepts respect from an ignorant
person.
yad yaj jano bhagavate vidadhīta Whatever worship a person offers to the Supreme
mānaṁ               Personality of Godhead,
tac cātmane prati-mukhasya yathā is for that person’s benefit, just as the beauty of a face
mukha-śrīḥ            produces a beautiful reflection.
Prahlāda’s confusions are gone. Since the Lord is pleased by bhakti, and not by good
birth or wealth, and since respecting Him is beneficial for all, Prahlāda decided to praise
the Lord’s glories, without consideration of his material position such as low-birth.
12. I will offer prayers as per my ability, for my purification
tasmād ahaṁ vigata-viklava    Therefore, having given up the contemplation of being
īśvarasya          unfit, I offer prayers to the Supreme controller,
sarvātmanā mahi gṛṇāmi yathā    in full surrender and endeavor, as far as my intelligence
manīṣam            allows.
nīco 'jayā guṇa-visargam    Anyone who has been forced by ignorance to enter the
anupraviṣṭaḥ         material world
may be purified of material life if he offers prayers to the
pūyeta yena hi pumān anuvarṇitena
Lord and hears His glories.
Having made up his mind to offer prayers for his own purification, Prahlāda humbly
begins his prayers. He once again describes his lower position compared to the devatās.
13-14: Requesting the Lord to give up His anger
13a. The devatās are not fearful like us. They are Your servants situated in sattva.
13b. Your pleasing incarnations (rucira-avatāra) are Your pastimes for Your pleasure
(ātma-sukhāya) and for the protection and prosperity (kṣemāya) of the universe.
Such pastimes as those of Nṛsiṁha-deva are certainly not meant to create a fearful
situation for the devotees, but nonetheless the devotees, being very simple and faithful,
were afraid of the fierce incarnation. Therefore Prahlāda requests Lord to give up His
anger.
14. Your present form causes fearlessness. Please give up anger.
tad yaccha manyum asuraś ca hatas O Lord, please cease Your anger, now that Your have
tvayādya                 killed the demon (Hiraṇyakaśipu) today.
modeta sādhur api vṛścikasarpa- Even saintly persons take pleasure in the killing of a
hatyā                  scorpion or a snake (because they are envious and
unnecessarily give suffering to people).
lokāś ca nirvṛtim itāḥ pratiyanti sarve All the worlds have achieved great satisfaction because
of the death of this demon.
rūpaṁ nṛsiṁha vibhayāya janāḥ They will always remember Your auspicious form of
smaranti                 Nṛsiṁha in order to be free from fear.
Devotees are not afraid of the Lord’s fearful form.
15-22: Seeking the Lord’s shelter
15. I am not afraid of ‘Your fearful form’
nāhaṁ bibhemy ajita te       O unconquerable Lord, I am not afraid of Your most
'tibhayānakāsya-         ferocious mouth,
jihvārka-netra-bhrukuṭīrabhasogra- tongue, bright sun-like eyes, frowning eyebrows, sharp
daṁṣṭrāt            and pinching teeth,
āntra-srajaḥ-kṣataja-keśaraśaṅku- garland of intestines, bloody mane, or high, wedgelike
karṇān             ears.
nirhrāda-bhīta-digibhād aribhin-    Nor do I fear Your tumultuous roaring, which makes
nakhāgrāt                 elephants flee, or Your nails that pierce the enemy.
Although Prahlāda wasn’t afraid of the Lord’s fearful form, he was afraid of the
material existence (samsāra) that produces aversion towards the Lord. Actually
Prahlāda, being a pure devotee, is not fearful of this world, but he was just representing
a conditined soul.
16. I am afraid of conditioned life. I need Your shelter.
trasto 'smy ahaṁ kṛpaṇa-vatsala O Lord, who are kind to the fallen souls! I am afraind of
duḥsahogra-           the intolerable and ferocious
saṁsāra-cakra-kadanād grasatāṁ cycle of birth and death. I am thrown in to the association
praṇītaḥ            of devouring demons and
baddhaḥ sva-karmabhir uśattama te bound by the reactions of my past deeds. O
'ṅghri-mūlaṁ prīto 'pavarga-  insurmountable Lord, when will You will call me to the
śaraṇaṁ hvayase kadā nu     shelter of Your lotus feet, the ultimate goal for
liberation?
The Lord might say to Prahlāda, “What will you do by serving My feet? Please enjoy
the happiness from the wealth of the three worlds conquered by your father.”
17. Material dualities and miserable remedies
yasmāt priyāpriya-viyogasaṁyoga- Because of this material existence I am experiencing
janma-              pleasing and displeasing circumstances, and separation
and meeting with friends and enemies.
śokāgninā sakala-yoniṣu        I am suffering in every form of life, as if burning in the
dahyamānaḥ                fire of lamentation.
duḥkhauṣadhaṁ tad api duḥkham       The remedies for material miseries are more miserable
atad-dhiyāhaṁ               than the miseries themselves.
bhūman bhramāmi vada me tava       O great Lord, kindly instruct me, who is wandering in the
dāsya-yogam                cycle of birth and death, in Your divine service.
The Lord might say to Prahlāda, “Though you attain service to Me, still you should
seek out some other solution for the material miseries.” - Prahlāda reveals some anger
and pride now.
18. Devotee’s life and duty: To glorify the Lord in paramparā
so 'haṁ priyasya suhṛdaḥ    O my Lord Nṛsiṁha, my dearmost well-wisher. I shall
paradevatāyā līlā-kathās tava chant Your glories, following the footsteps of Lord
nṛsiṁha viriñca-gītāḥ     Brahmā and his disciplic succession.
añjas titarmy anugṛṇan     By such glorification, I shall easily be purified of the
guṇavipramukto         contamination of material modes and cross
durgāṇi te pada-yugālaya-    over all the miserable conditions of material life. I shall
haṁsasaṅgaḥ           serve You in the association of liberated devotees who
constantly meditate on Your feet.
19. Lord Nṛsiṁha is the only shelter
bālasya neha śaraṇaṁ      My Lord Nṛsiṁha-deva!
pitarau nṛsiṁha        (i) A father and mother cannot protect their child.
nārtasya cāgadam        (ii) A doctor and medicine cannot relieve a patient.
udanvati majjato nauḥ     (iii) A boat on the ocean cannot protect a drowning man.
taptasya tat-pratividhir ya The remedies accepted by people for their miseries in
ihāñjaseṣṭas         this world are not a shelter at all.
tāvad vibho tanu-bhṛtāṁ tvad- O Lord, embodied souls who do not accept You or not
upekṣitānām          cared for by You can’t do anything for their betterment.
Why the conditioned souls cannot do anything for their betterment?
20. Your energies manifest everything including the cause for which people work, the
place where they work, the time when they work, the matter due to which they work,
the goal of their life, and the process of obtaining that goal. Indeed, since the energy and
energetic are identical, all of them are but manifestations of You.
The Lord might ask, “If I am the form of everything, then I am also saṁsāra. Why
then do you want liberation from My form of saṁsāra?” Prahlāda answers this in next
two verses.
21. Your shelter liberates us from māyā: By Your puruṣa expansion, You have
created the subtle bodies of the jīvas through māyā, agitated by time (kāla). Thus the
mind entraps the jīva in unlimited desires to be fulfilled by Vedic directions and sixteen
elements. Who can get free from this wheel of saṁsāra unless he takes Your shelter?
Why only the Lord can save the entangled conditioned souls?
22. You are the controller of māyā and are never conquered by the material qualities.
The time element is Your representation. I am being crushed by the wheel of time
(niṣpīḍyamānam). Kindly take me under Your protection (upakarṣa vibho). I surrender
unto You (prapannam).
Prahlāda was not giving importance to this material world because he had the
previous experience of seeing his father’s suffering.
23-25: Experience of seeing the futility of material pleasures
23. I have seen the futility of āyu, śriya and vibhava i.e., long life, opulence and
power of the devatās, which people desire. Simply by the movements of my fathers’
eyebrows in anger, the devatās were vanquished. Yet my powerful father has now been
vanquished by You within a moment.
The Lord might ask Prahlāda, “So what do you want?”
24. Let me serve Your pure devotee
tasmād amūs tanu-bhṛtām aham Therefore, I have full experience of the futility of
āśiṣo 'jña āyuḥ śriyaṁ vibhavam worldly opulence, mystic power, longevity and other
aindriyam āviriñcyāt        material pleasures enjoyed by all living entities, from
Lord Brahmā down to the ant.
necchāmi te vilulitān uruvikrameṇa So, I do not desire them. As time, You destroy them all.
kālātmanopanaya māṁ nija-       Please take me to the side of Your pure devotee and let
bhṛtyapārśvam            me serve him as a sincere servant.
The Lord might ask Prahlāda, “What is this? Everyone desires enjoyment and power
and you are rejecting them?”
25. The happiness of this material world is insubstantial
kutrāśiṣaḥ śruti-sukhā mṛgatṛṣṇi-
What is the use of material benedictions, which are
rūpāḥ           pleasant only to hear about, like a mirage in the desert?
kvedaṁ kalevaram aśeṣarujāṁ  What is the value of material body, which is merely a
virohaḥ          source of unlimited diseases?
nirvidyate na tu jano yad apīti vidvān
The so-called philosophers, scientists and politicians
know this very well, yet they aspire for temporary
happiness.
kāmānalaṁ madhu-lavaiḥ śamayan They pacify the fire of desire by a drop of hard-earned
durāpaiḥ            happiness, but do not become detached.
Prahlāda acknowledges the special mercy that Lord Nṛsiṁha had showed upon him.
26-29: The Supreme Lord’s mercy
26. You have mercifully put You hand on my head
kvāhaṁ rajaḥ-prabhava īśa tamo O Lord, where am I, who was born in a family of demons
'dhike 'smin jātaḥ suretara-kule kva full of passion and ignorance? What is to be said of Your
tavānukampā               causeless mercy
na brahmaṇo na tu bhavasya na vai which was never offered even to Brahmā, Śiva or
ramāyā                Lakṣmī? (You never put Your hand on their heads)
yan me 'rpitaḥ śirasi padma-karaḥ You placed Your merciful lotus hand upon my head (and
prasādaḥ               made me the greatest though I am low).
The Lord’s causeless mercy may be bestowed upon anyone, regardless of one’s
material position. Everyone is eligible to worship the Lord, irrespective of one’s
material position.
27. You are reciprocal, not partial
naiṣā parāvara-matir bhavato nanu You do not discriminate by high or low birth
syāj
jantor yathātma-suhṛdo jagatas like the ordinary people, because You are the friend of
tathāpi              the whole universe. Still,
saṁsevayā surataror iva te prasādaḥ You reciprocate according to the level of one's service,
exactly as a desire tree.
sevānurūpam udayo na parāvaratvam Your mercy is according to the degree of service, and not
by high or low birth.
The Lord might ask Prahlāda, “You have said that service to Me is the cause of My
mercy to you. You have excluded favoritism by the example of desire tree. But what is
the cause of this service by a devotee?”
28. I want to serve Nārada Muni who saved me
evaṁ janaṁ nipatitaṁ prabhavāhi- I was gradually falling into a blind well full of snakes,
kūpe                 following the general populace.
kāmābhikāmam anu yaḥ prapatan Because of my association with material desires, one
prasaṅgāt                after another, I was falling down.
kṛtvātmasāt surarṣiṇā bhagavan But Your servant Nārada Muni accepted me as his
gṛhītaḥ                disciple and made me achieve spiritual position. O Lord!
so 'haṁ kathaṁ nu visṛje tava bhṛtya- How can I give up service to your servant? It is my first
sevām                 duty to serve him.
29. You proved Your devotee Nārada’s words true by saving me and killing my
father, O unlimited Lord! Taking his sword, my father told me, “Let your Lord protect
you! I will cut off your head.”
30-38: The Supreme Lord and the cosmos
30. Whatever exits is You alone, as through Your māyā and the three modes, You
create, maintain and destroy this universe and yet You exist beyond it.
Energy in which the Lord’s all-pervasiveness is not realized is called material. Otherwise,
everything is spiritual.
31. You and the cosmos are related as the seed and the tree, or the subtle cause and
the gross manifestation. You are the universe, its cause and its effect, yet you are
different from it. You also cause its annihilation. The conception of ‘mine and yours’ is
illusory (māyā).
In the next five verses, Prahlāda elaborates on the Lord being the cause of the
universe, being situated at its beginning, middle and end.
32. As Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, You place the universe within You after its
annihilation, and appear to sleep (yoga-nidra) in the casual ocean, enjoying spiritual
bliss (in turiya stage), without interest in material objects.
33. As Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, You awaken from the bed of Ananta, and from Your
navel the seed of the lotus of universe is manifested, like a banyan tree grows from a
seed. This universe, Your body, composed of the modes of prakṛti, which was merged
in Your body, was agitated by Your time energy (kāla-śakti) to come out like this.
34. Brahmā appeared from that lotus and he dove into the water to find the source of
the lotus for one hundred years. He could find no trace of You, however, for when a
seed fructifies, the original seed cannot be seen.
35. Brahmā did severe austerities and after thus being purified, he could see You, the
cause of all causes, within himself, spread throughout his own body and senses, just as
aroma is perceived in the earth.
36. Brahmā saw Your form with thousands of faces, feet, heads, hands, thighs, noses,
ears and eyes (mahā-puruṣa). Thus he achieved transcendental bliss.
37. You appeared as Hayagrīva, with the head of a horse (haya-śira), You killed the
demons Madhu and Kaiṭabha (in raja and tama) and gave the Vedas to Brahmā. The
sages honor Your forms as transcendental, untinged by material qualities (sattva).
38. Your various incarnations; You are triyuga
itthaṁ nṛ-tiryag-ṛṣi-      In this way, You incarnate as a human being (Rāma), an
devajhaṣāvatārair         animal (Varāha), a saint (Paraśurāma), a devatā
(Vāmana), an aquatic (Matsya and Kūrma),
lokān vibhāvayasi haṁsi jagat   thus maintaining the entire creation in different planetary
pratīpān            systems and killing the demoniac principles.
dharmaṁ mahā-puruṣa pāsi       According to the age, O my Lord, You protect the
yugānuvṛttaṁ           principles of religion.
channaḥ kalau yad abhavas tri-yugo In Kali yuga, You do not assert Yourself as the Supreme
'tha sa tvam          Lord (Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu), and thus You are
known as Triyuga, or the Lord who appears in three
yugas.
Representing a common man, Prahlāda humbly asks the Lord, “Constantly appearing,
You shower the nectar of Your form, qualities and pastimes. But my sinful mind does
not take pleasure in this. What shall I do?” In this mood Prahlāda speaks the next three
verses.
39-45: Prahlāda’s humility and concern for fallen souls
39. Sinful state of the material mind
naitan manas tava kathāsu     O Lord of Vaikuṇṭha, my uncontrollable and dishonest
vikuṇṭhanātha samprīyate durita- mind is polluted by sinful activities, and is not satisfied
duṣṭam asādhu tīvram       with Your topics.
kāmāturaṁ harṣa-śoka-       It is afflicted by lust, so-called joy, distress, lamentation,
bhayaiṣaṇārtaṁ          fear and desire for money.
tasmin kathaṁ tava gatiṁ vimṛśāmi In such a mental status, how then can this wretch think of
dīnaḥ               Your activities?
In the next verse, Prahlāda gives the reason why his mind has become so sinful.
40. Embarrassment by ever-distracted senses
jihvaikato 'cyuta      O infallible Lord,
vikarṣati māvitṛptā     my unsatisfied tongue pulls me to palatable dishes,
śiśno 'nyatas        my genitals pull me for sex,
tvag-            my skin pulls me to touch soft things,
udaraṁ            my belly wants to eat more,
śravaṇaṁ kutaścit           my ear is attracted to mundane music,
ghrāṇo 'nyataś capaladṛk kva ca    my sense of smell pulls in another way,
karma-śaktir              my restless eyes want to see scenes of sense gratification,
and
my active senses are attracted elsewhere.
bahvyaḥ sapatnya iva geha-patiṁ     I am like a person with many wives, each pulling him in
lunanti                 her own way. (Thus I have no time for chanting Your
glories.)
Prahlāda, a pure Vaiṣṇava, prays not only for himself but for the deliverance of all
other living entities suffering in this material world.
41. O Lord, You are on the other side of Vaitaraṇī, the river of death. Due to our
karma, we have fallen into this river and are fearful, suffering the pains of birth and
death. Now by Your causeless mercy and compassion, help us cross this river.
Here, Prahlāda is not praying for his own deleverance only, but for everyone’s. There are
two classes of Vaiṣṇavas – (i) Bhajanānandīs, who worship the Lord for their own benefit
and (ii) Goṣṭhy-ānandīs, who try to elevate all others to Kṛṣṇa consciousness.
42. Compassionately deliver us all: O original guru of the world (akhila-guro), what
is difficult for You, who manage the universal affairs, in delivering fallen souls? You
are the friend of suffering humanity (ārta-bandho). Great people are merciful to the
foolish.
43. I am fearless, but concerned about the fools
naivodvije para           I am not at all disturbed or afraid of the insurmountable
duratyayavaitaraṇyās          material existence or Vaitaraṇi river.
tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahāmṛta-magna- Because my consciousness is fully absorbed in the
cittaḥ               nectarean bliss of chanting Your glories.
śoce tato vimukha-cetasa indriyārtha- I simply lament for those who are averse to You and
making plans for sense gratification.
māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato Such fools carry the burden of illusory happiness in
vimūḍhān               maintaining their families, societies and countries.
44. I don’t wish to be delivered alone, leaving these fools
prāyeṇa deva munayaḥ svavimukti- O Lord! I see many sages are generally interested only in
kāmā                their own deliverance.
maunaṁ caranti vijane na parārtha- They practice silence, and wander in solitary places
niṣṭhāḥ              (Himalayas), not caring for the deliverance of others.
naitān vihāya kṛpaṇān vimumukṣa As for me, however, I do not wish to be liberated alone,
eko                leaving aside all these poor fools.
nānyaṁ tvad asya śaraṇaṁ bhramato I do not see any shelter other than You for those
'nupaśye              wandering blindly in this world.
45. The insignificant happiness of gṛhamedhis
yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhisukhaṁ hi The material happiness of household life and sex life is
tucchaṁ             insignificant.
kaṇḍūyanena karayor iva duḥkha- It is like the increased suffering created by rubbing itchy
duḥkham             hands together.
tṛpyanti neha kṛpaṇā bahuduḥkha- Despite such suffering, the lusty fools are not satisfied by
bhājaḥ             repeated sense enjoyment.
kaṇḍūtivan manasijaṁ viṣaheta       Knowing that the pleasure of such itch is only a mental
dhīraḥ                   concoction, the sober people tolerate it.
46-50: Bhakti, the ultimate refuge
46. The ten methods namely, silence (mauna), vows (vrata), Vedic knowledge (śruta),
austerity (tapa), scriptural study (adhyayana), occupational duty (sva-dharma), to
explain śāstras (vyākhya), living alone (raha), japa, and trance (samādhi), are generally
a professional practice and means of livelihood for those who cannot control senses.
47. Your energy manifests the cosmos and all forms of cause and effect within it. Just
as a wise man can see how fire pervades wood, those engaged in bhakti understand how
You are both the cause and effect.
48. You are everything subtle and gross – including the air, earth, fire, sky, water,
sense objects, life airs, five senses, mind, consciousness and false ego. Anything
expressed, either by the words or by the mind, are nothing but You.
49. No one can understand You, including the three modes and their controlling
deities, the five gross elements, mind, devatās, human beings, because they are all
subject to birth and annihilation (martya). Considering this, the wise (sudhiya) engage
in bhakti.
Since one cannot know the Lord by study and other methods, giving up efforts to
know Him, one should strive to perform sādhana for prema unto Him. Prahlāda
Mahārāja summarizes his prayers in the last verse.
50. The six kinds of bhakti are offering prayers (stuti), dedicating results of activities
(karma), worshiping (pūja), working on Your behalf (karma), remembering Your lotus
feet (smṛtiś caraṇayoḥ) and hearing Your glories (śravaṇaṁ kathāyām). How can one
attain prema without these six types of bhakti?
8-50: PRAHLĀDA MAHĀRĀJA’S PRAYERS AT A GLANCE
51-55: LORD NṚSIṀHA’S REPLY TO PRAHLĀDA’S PRAYERS
51. Nṛsiṁha-deva pacified: When Prahlāda described the qualities (guṇa) of
Nṛsiṁhadeva, who is devoid of material qualities (nirguṇa), the Lord gave up anger and
spoke as follows:
52. I am pleased, ask for a boon: “Gentle Prahlāda, all good fortune unto you. I am
pleased with you. I fulfill the desires of all, you may ask from Me any benediction.
53. Seeing Me is very rare for those who do not please Me. But one who has seen or
pleased Me has nothing more to lament for one’s satisfaction. May you live long.
mām aprīṇata āyuṣman darśanaṁ durlabhaṁ hi me
dṛṣṭvā māṁ na punar jantur ātmānaṁ taptum arhati
54. Only I can fulfill everyone’s desires. Therefore the wise try to please Me in all
different rasas (mellows), for I am the master of all blessings.
prīṇanti hy atha māṁ dhīrāḥ sarva-bhāvena sādhavaḥ
śreyas-kāmā mahā-bhāga sarvāsām āśiṣāṁ patim
55. Prahlāda didn’t desire any material boon, though he was born in demoniac
family and was allured by the Lord. It was due to his unalloyed bhakti.
6 The twelve brahminical qualities mentioned in Sanat-sujāta are – knowledge, truth, mind control, sense control,
hearing, detachment, shyness, tolerance, non-envy, sacrifice, charity, fortitude, and peacefulness.
jñānaṁ ca satyaṁ ca damaḥ śrutaṁ ca hy amātsaryaṁ hrīs titikṣānasūyā
yajñaś ca dānaṁ ca dhṛtiḥ śamaś ca mahā-vratā dvādaśa brāhmaṇasya
7.10 PRAHLĀDA, THE BEST AMONG EXALTED
DEVOTEES
1-10: PRAHLĀDA MAHĀRĀJA REFUSES TO ACCEPT MATERIAL BENEDICTIONS
1. Prahlāda considered the benedictions offered by Lord Nṛsiṁha-deva (in 7.9.52) to be
impediments in bhakti-yoga. Thus he smiled and spoke as follows.
Prahlāda smiled and thought, “Tempting an ignorant boy, the Lord is testing me.”
2. Don’t tempt me with material boons
mā māṁ pralobhayotpattyā     Please do not allure me; due to my demoniac birth,
saktaṁkāmeṣu tair varaiḥ    I am already attached to material enjoyment and boons.
tat-saṅga-bhīto nirviṇṇo   I am afraid of material association and I am detached
from material desires.
mumukṣus tvām upāśritaḥ     I desire liberation and have taken Your shelter.
Lord Nṛsiṁha might say, “Do I actually tempt My devotees?” Prahlāda responds, “Your
intention is to show to everyone the highest standard of Your pure devotee.”
3. Desiring to exhibit the symptoms of Your devotee, You have sent me to this world of lusty
desires, the seed of material existence which creates knot in the heart.
The Supreme Lord has no desire to send His pure devotee to this material world, nor does
a devotee have any material purpose in coming here. A pure devotee sets the best example
for the common people to follow, by his behavior.
4. I am not a merchant: You are so kind that You could not induce a devotee to do something
unbeneficial for him. One who desires material benefit in exchange for devotional service is no
better than a merchant (vaṇik).
5. Pure servant and master: A servant who desires material profits is not a qualified servant. A
master who bestows boons to maintain his position is not a pure master.
āśāsāno na vai bhṛtyaḥ svāminy āśiṣa ātmanaḥ
na svāmī bhṛtyataḥ svāmyam icchan yo rāti cāśiṣaḥ
The devatās, to keep their prestigious positions, offer their worshipers whatever boons
they want. So, a devatā cannot become master, for the real master is the Supreme Lord.
6. I am Your unmotivated servant, (ahaṁ tv akāmas tvad-bhaktas) and You are my eternal
master (tvaṁ ca svāmy anapāśrayaḥ) not ‘dependant’ on my service. We have no other
relationship, like the material kings and their servants.
Lord Nṛsiṁha might say, “Please accept something to please Me.”
7. May I not have any material desires
yadi dāsyasi me kāmān      If You at all want to bestow a benediction that I
varāṁs tvaṁ varadarṣabha     desire, O best of the givers of benediction,
kāmānāṁ hṛdy asaṁrohaṁ       then I pray that within the core of my heart
bhavatas tu vṛṇe varam     let there be no material desires (I desire Your service
only).
8. The negative effects of material desires
indriyāṇi manaḥ prāṇa      The functions of one's senses, mind, life,
ātmā dharmo dhṛtir matiḥ     body, religion, patience, intelligence,
hrīḥ śrīs tejaḥ smṛtiḥ satyaṁ shyness, wealth, strength, memory and truthfulness
yasya naśyanti janmanā        are all destroyed from the very beginning of one's birth.
Lord Nṛsiṁha might say, “If you do not desire benedictions, then why do you desire service to
Me, saying that you want to be My servant?”
9. When one is able to give up all material desires, he becomes eligible to possess opulence
like Yours (bhagavattva).
Bhagavattva does not mean becoming one with the Lord or exactly equal to Him. The
servant in the spiritual world is engaged in Lord’s service as a servant, friend, father,
mother or conjugal lover, all of whom are equally as opulent as the Lord. This is
acintyabhedābheda-tattva. The master and servant are different yet equal in opulence.
Achieving the platform of bhagavattva, or being as good as the Supreme Person, does not
mean that the devotee loses his position as a servant. A pure devotee, although as opulent as the
Lord, is still meant to offer respectful obeisances to the Lord in service.
10. I offer respects to the Lord, full of six qualities, the Supreme Person, the Supreme soul,
killer of all miseries, the wonderful lion and man, Brahman and Paramātmā.
oṁ namo bhagavate tubhyaṁ puruṣāya mahātmane
haraye 'dbhuta-siṁhāya brahmaṇe paramātmane
11-34: LORD NṚSIṀHA-DEVA’S INSTRUCTIONS AND PRAHLĀDA CORONATION
11-14: Lord Nṛsiṁha-deva’s instructions to Prahlāda
11. Enjoy opulences: A devotee like you never desires material benedictions. Yet I order you to
enjoy as the king of demons until the end of this manvantara (seventy-one yuga cycles, each of
which equals 4,300,000 years).
Prahlāda Mahārāja might ask, “Because of what offense are You throwing me in the hole of
material life?”
12. Perform bhakti-yoga: It does not matter that you are in the material world. You should
always hear My topics and be absorbed in My thought. Give up fruitive activities (karma-yoga)
and worship Me (bhakti-yoga).
Lord Nṛsiṁha tells Prahlāda, “Don’t worry about karma. You are a jīvan-mukta, already
liberated in this very life even in the material body.”
13. Process of liberation from bondage
bhogena puṇyaṁ kuśalena pāpaṁ Having given up piety by enjoyment, sin by pious acts
kalevaraṁ kāla-javena hitvā  and material body by passage of time –
kīrtiṁ viśuddhāṁ sura-loka-gītāṁ Your pure glory will be sung in heavenly planets.
vitāya mām eṣyasi mukta-bandhaḥ You will be free from bondage and will come to Me.
Lord Nṛsiṁha said, “Not only you are free of bondage, but others who remember you become
free of bondage as well.”
14. One who remembers your activities and My activities, and who chants the prayers you have
offered to Me, becomes free from the material reactions.
Previously Prahlāda prayed for the deliverance of all people suffering in this world. Now, he
prays for the deliverance of one great sinner, his father. Although Hiraṇyakaśipu was purified as
soon as he came in contact with Lord Nṛsiṁha’s glance and lap, Prahlāda still wanted to hear
from the Lord’s own mouth that his father had been purified by His mercy.
15-17: Prahlāda prays for Hiraṇyakaśipu’s deliverance
15-17. Prahlāda asks for a benediction, “Because You are merciful to the fallen, I ask You for
only one benediction. Out of ignorance, My father thought that You killed his brother. He was
angry at You, blasphemed You, and committed sins against me, Your devotee. I wish that he be
excused for these sinful activities.”
18-23: Lord Nṛsiṁha glorifies the potency of devotees
18. Dynasty purified: Your father has been purified, along with twenty-one forefathers. Because
of your birth, your entire dynasty has been purified (kula-pāvanaḥ).
19. Purification by devotees’ presence
yatra yatra ca mad-bhaktāḥ  Wherever and whenever there are My devotees
praśāntāḥ sama-darśinaḥ    who are peaceful, equipoised
sādhavaḥ samudācārās      well-behaved and endowed with all good qualities,
te pūyante 'pi kīkaṭāḥ   they purify even condemned dynasties and places.
20. Impartial and nonenvious: Because of love for Me, My devotees are free from material
desires (vigata-spṛha), do not distinguish between lower and higher living entities, and are never
jealous of anyone.
Prahlāda might say, “The greatness of those devotees is not astonishing to me. But I am not
like that.” The Lord says that Prahlāda is an exemplary devotee.
21. You are the best: Those who follow your example will naturally become My pure devotees.
You are the best example of all devotees.
22. Father’s funeral: Your father has already been purified by My touch at the time of his
death. Perform his funeral rites. Having the best son, he will attain the best planets.
Although Hiraṇyakaśipu was already purified, he had to take birth on a higher planetary
system to become a devotee again.
23. Take charge of your father's kingdom as directed by the brāhmaṇas. Fixing your mind
upon Me (mat-paraḥ), perform your duties as a matter of formality.
A devotee is not obliged to follow Vedic regulative principles (See SB 11.5.41), but still
he does them as a matter of ettiquette, to set example for common people. However, his
faith is in the Supreme Lord and not in those rituals.
24. Prahlāda performed the death rituals for his father. Later he was then enthroned as the king
by the brāhmaṇas.
25. Lord Brahmā, surrounded by the devatās, offered his prayers to Lord Nṛsiṁha.
26-29: Brahmā’s prayers to Lord Nṛsiṁha
26. O Lord of all devatās (deva-deva), proprietor of the universe (akhila-adhyakṣa), cause of all
living entities (bhūta-bhāvana) and original Lord (pūrva-ja)! By our good fortune, You have
killed this sinful demon who was troubling the universe.
27. This demon received benediction from me that he wouldn’t be killed by anyone within my
creation. Proud of his austerity, he destroyed the Vedic system.
28. Prahlāda has been saved now from death. He is an exalted devotee and is now fully under
Your protection.
29. If one meditates upon You, You naturally protect him from all sources of fear, including
death.
30. Lord Nṛsiṁha to Brahmā, “It is dangerous to give benedictions to demons, just as it is
dangerous to feed milk to a snake. I warn you not to give such benedictions to any demon again.”
31. Being worshiped by Brahmā, the Lord then disappeared.
32. Prahlāda Mahārāja then worshiped all the devatās like Brahmā, Śiva and others.
33. Thereafter Brahmā made Prahlāda the king of all the demons.
34. The devatās offered benedictions to Prahlāda and returned to their abodes.
The discourse concerning Lord Nṛsiṁha and Prahlāda began when King Yudhiṣṭhira asked
Nārada Muni how Śiśupāla and Dantavakra attained sāyujya-mukti (in 7.1.16-21). Thus Nārada
told the story of their previous births. Now the story is concluded. Nārada will now relate how in
three different births the associates of Lord Viṣṇu were killed by Viṣṇu Himself.
35-50: NĀRADA MUNI CONCLUDES THE NARRATION
35-40: The three births of Jaya and Vijaya
35. First birth: Thus the two associates of Viṣṇu (Jaya and Vijaya) who became the sons of Diti
(Hiraṇyakaśipu and Hiraṇyākṣa), were both killed. By illusion they had thought that the Supreme
Lord was their enemy.
36-37. Second birth: They again took birth as Kumbhakarṇa and Rāvaṇa, and were killed by
Lord Rāma. Both of them left their bodies, absorbed in thought of the Lord.
38. Third birth: They took birth again as Śiśupāla and Dantavakra and continued their enmity.
It is they who merged into the body of the Lord.
39. Salvation by absorption: Many kings who acted as enemies of Kṛṣṇa attained salvation and
received spiritual bodies, because they thought of the Lord at the time of death. This is similar to
a worm becoming a wasp by meditating on the wasp.
40. Sārūpya mukti: Pure devotees receive sārūpya-mukti by practicing bhakti. Kings who
thought of Kṛṣṇa as an enemy also achieved the same result.
41-50: Conclusion, Phala-śruti and glorification of Pandavas
41-42. Nārada concludes: I have explained what you (Yudhiṣṭhira) have asked about Śiśupāla’s
salvation. In this narration, various incarnations of the Lord, and the killing of the two demons
have been described.
43-45. This narration describes –
Mahā-bhāgavata Prahlāda’s bhakti, jñāna and varakti
The qualities and activities of the Supreme Lord
Bhāgavata-dharma, the principles of religion by which one understands the Lord
46-47. Phala-śruti: One who faithfully hears and chants the narration of the activities and
omnipotence of Lord Nṛsiṁha, the pure devotion of Prahlāda and the killing of Hiraṇyakaśpu is
– liberated from material bondage and transferred to spiritual world.
A pure devotee always thinks himself to be the lowest, incompetent and unqualified. Thus
after hearing the narration of Prahlāda, Yudhiṣṭhira, who was also on the same standard of bhakti
as Prahlāda, lamented out of his humility, “Oh! Prahlāda was so fortunate to see the Lord. But
we are not so fortunate!” Nārada immediately encouraged him as follows.
48. You (Pāṇḍavas) are most fortunate, for Kṛṣṇa personally lives in your palace, because He
is attracted to you. Knowing this, great saints visit your house.
Although Lord Nṛsiṁha-deva appeared for Prahlāda, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
in His original form as Kṛṣṇa was always living with the Pāṇḍavas. Nārada Muni said,
“You Pāṇḍavas are more fortunate than Prahlāda, than me, his guru, than other devotees,
than previous members of your dynasty like Yadu and Puru, than the sages like Vaśiṣṭha,
Marīci and Kaśyapa, than Brahmā and Śiva. You are most fortunate among all jīvas. Kṛṣṇa
does not personally live in human form in the houses of Prahlāda and others. And the
sages do not come there to see Him!”
49. Kṛṣṇa is your intimate friend, cousin, constant well-wisher and spiritual master. He is the
source of Brahman yet acts as your servant.
Yudhiṣṭhira might ask, “Why does the basis of Brahman act as a servant for the vision of
material people like us?” Nārada Muni now explains the difficulty in understanding or describing
about Kṛṣṇa’s great powers and His being controlled by the devotees’ prema.
50. Even Śiva and Brahmā could not properly describe the truth of the Supreme Lord. May the
Lord be pleased with us.
Yudhiṣṭhira might ask, “Brahmā may not understand Kṛṣṇa, but Śiva can understand!” To
explain this, Nārada narrates another story (that even Śiva derives power from Kṛṣṇa).
51. Nārada Muni said, “Long long ago, Maya Dānava reduced the reputation of Lord Śiva. In
that situation, the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa saved Lord Śiva.”
52. Yudhiṣṭhira asked, “For what reason did Maya Dānava vanquish Lord Śiva's reputation?
How did Lord Kṛṣṇa save Lord Śiva?”
Now Nārada Muni narrates the story of Śiva killing the demons with the help of Viṣṇu.
53. When the devatās defeated the demons, the demons took shelter of Maya Dānava.
54-56. Mystic Maya Dānava made three invisible residences resembling airplanes made of
gold, silver and iron and gave them to the demons. Thus the demons remained invisible to the
devatās and began to vanquish the three worlds. Then the rulers of those planets surrendered to
Lord Śiva, for protection.
57-59a. Lord Śiva reassured the devatās and released his golden arrows that covered the three
residential airplanes of the demons and the demons lost their lives.
59b-61. Maya Dānava revived the demons by putting their dead bodies into a well of nectar
(mṛta-sañjīvayitā). The demons then became strong like thunderbolts and got up like lightening.
Śiva became disappointed. Lord Viṣṇu then thought of a solution.
62-63. Lord Viṣṇu and Brahmā became a cow and a calf respectively and drank all the nectar
in the well. Because of the Lord’s illusion, the demons could not forbid the cow and calf. Maya
Dānava could understand this.
64. Maya Dānava said to the demons, “What has been destined by the Supreme Lord cannot be
undone anywhere, by anyone including the devatās, demons or humans.”
devo 'suro naro 'nyo vā neśvaro 'stīha kaścana
ātmano 'nyasya vā diṣṭaṁ daivenāpohituṁ dvayoḥ
Maya Dānava said, “However I plan, you plan or both of us plan, the Lord has planned
what is to happen. No one's plan will be successful without His sanction.”
65-66. Thereafter, Lord Kṛṣṇa equipped Śiva with all paraphernalia, like a chariot, a
charioteer, flag, horses, elephants, bow, shield and arrows, which were empowered by Kṛṣṇa’s
potency consisting of religion, knowledge, renunciation, opulence, austerity, education and
activities. Then Śiva sat on the chariot to fight with the demons.
67-69. Śiva set fire to all three residences and destroyed them. The devatās, saints and others
showered flowers and praised Śiva. Śiva became known as Tripurāri.
70. Thus Śrī Kṛṣṇa performed many uncommon, wonderful pastimes, hearing which everyone
can be purified.
7.11 THE PERFECT SOCIETY: FOUR SOCIAL CLASSES
The first ten chapters of the Seventh Canto described the pure inclination (ūti) arising from
unalloyed bhakti unmixed with material modes. The last five chapters describe the excellence of
varṇāśrama for material sustenance. They describe niṣkāma-karma-yoga as the cause of
inclinations for bhakti mixed with material modes. In this chapter, Nārada Muni describes the
duties of the normal varṇas, the duties of women and mixed varṇas.
1. After hearing about Prahlāda’s glorious character adored by great devotees, King Yudhiṣṭhira
again inquired from the Nārada Muni with joy.
2. Yudhiṣṭhira wanted to hear about two topics –
Q1. Sanātana-dharma or the eternal religion of human beings i.e., bhakti yoga
Q2. Varṇāśrama-dharma or the social and spiritual duties of humans
Sanātanam means “that which remains after the result is achieved.” It refers to bhaktiyoga
which is not given up even after achieving prema.
3-4. Yudhiṣṭhira glorifies Nārada Muni, “Because of your austerities and mystic yoga, you are
considered as the best of Brahmā’s sons. No one knows better than you, all the principles of
religious life and how to execute devotional service.”
5-12: NĀRADA MUNI EXPLAINS PRINCIPLES OF SANĀTANA DHARMA
5. Offering obeisances to Lord Kṛṣṇa, the protector of dharma (dharma-setave), I will first
explain the principles of sanātana dharma, which I have heard from Nārāyaṇa.
6. Lord Nārāyaṇa appeared along with Nara in this world, through Mūrti and Dharma. Even
now, He is executing austerities at Badarikāśrama.
7. Complete satisfaction by hari-bhakti
dharma-mūlaṁ hi bhagavān     The Supreme Lord is the root of all religious principles.
sarva-vedamayo hariḥ       Lord Hari is the essence of all Vedic knowledge.
smṛtaṁ ca tad-vidāṁ rājan yena On the basis of this religious principle, everything is
cātmā prasīdati         satisfied, O King (This is similar to SB 1.2.6 sa vai
puṁsām… yayātmā su prasīdati)
Now Nārada answers the first question (Q1 in 7.11.2) of Yudhiṣṭhira on sanātana dharma.
8-12: Thirty qualities by which one can satisfy the Supreme Lord
satyaṁ dayā tapaḥ śaucaṁ    (1) Truthfulness (2) mercy (3) austerity (4) cleanliness
titika īkṣā śamo damaḥ         (5) tolerance (6) discrimination (7-8) mind & sense
control
ahiṁsā brahmacaryaṁ ca          (9) nonviolence (10) celibacy
tyāgaḥ svādhyāya ārjavam         (11) charity (12) reading of scripture (13) simplicity
santoṣaḥ samadṛk-sevā          (14) satisfaction (15) serving the equipoised saints
grāmyehoparamaḥ śanaiḥ           (16) gradually taking leave of unnecessary engagements
nṛṇāṁ viparyayehekṣā           (17) observing the futility of unnecessary acts of
humanity
maunam ātma-vimarśanam           (18) Silence and gravity (19) researching one’s own self
annādyādeḥ saṁvibhāgo bhūtebhyaś (20) distributing food equally to all living entities as it is
ca yathārhataḥ            befitting (as much as they deserve)
teṣv ātma-devatā-buddhiḥ sutarāṁ (21) seeing every soul as a part of the Supreme Lord,
nṛṣu pāṇḍava             oneself or a devatā
śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ cāsya         (22) hearing about the Lord (23) chanting about Him
smaraṇaṁ mahatāṁ gateḥ          (24) remembering the Lord and His devotees
sevejyāvanatir dāsyaṁ         (25) service (26) worship (27) obeisances, (28) servant
sakhyam ātma-samarpaṇam          (29) becoming a friend (30) surrendering one's whole
self.
12. These 30 qualifications must be acquired in the human life. By that one can satisfy the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Having answered the first question (Q1) of Yudhiṣṭhira about sanātana-dharma, Nārada Muni
will now answer his second question (Q2) about varṇāśrama-dharma. This answer starts from
the next verse and continues till the end of the Seventh Canto.
13-24: THE FOUR VARṆAS OR CASTES
13-16: Occupational duties of the four varṇas
13. Dvijas (twice-born) are those who perform the saṁskāras (reformatory ceremonies) with
mantras. Such brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas and vaiśyas, purified by family traditions and behavior,
should worship the Lord, study the Vedas, give charity and follow the principles of the four
āśramas [brahmacarya, gṛhastha, vānaprastha and sannyāsa].
In the varṇāśrama system, the first ceremony for purification is garbhādhāna, which is
performed with mantras at the time of sex for propagating a good child. One who uses sex
life not for sensual pleasures but only to beget good children is also accepted as a
brahmacārī. Restraint in sex is possible only when the populace is trained in the
abovementioned thirty qualities (in 7.11.8-11).
14a. Brāhmaṇas have six occupational duties – worshiping Kṛṣṇa and teaching others to
worship, studying Vedas and teaching others, accepting charity and giving charity.
14b. Kṣatriyas should not accept charity, but they may perform the other five duties of
brāhmaṇas. A kṣatriya is not allowed to levy taxes on brāhmaṇas, but he may make his
livelihood by levying taxes and fines upon his other subjects.
15a. Vaiśyas (mercantile community) should follow the directions of brāhmaṇas and do
agriculture, trade and cow protection.
15b. Śūdras accept a master from a higher social order and serve him to earn livelihood.
16. Four alternative duties for brāhmaṇas (from lowest to highest)
i. Vārtā – Vaiśya’s duty of agriculture, cow protection or trade
ii. Śālinā – depending on that which is received without begging
iii. Yāyāvara – begging in the paddy field for one day’s grains
iv. Śiloñchanam – collecting paddy left in a field or in the shops of grain dealers
A brāhmaṇa is sometimes offered land and cows in charity, and thus for his livelihood he
may act in the same way as a vaiśya, by cultivating land, protecting cows and trading off
his surpluses. A better process, however, is to pick up grains from a field or shops.
17-20: Emergency duties
17. Emergency situations: Except in emergency, lower persons should not accept the
occupational duties of higher castes. In emergency, however, everyone but the kṣatriya may
accept the means of livelihood of others.
18-20. In emergency, one may accept the following professions
i. Ṛta – collecting grains from the field (uñchaśila)
ii. Amṛta – collecting without begging
iii. Mṛta – begging grains
iv. Pramṛta – tilling the ground
v. Satyānṛta – trade
But one shouldn’t accept the profession of dog (śva-vṛtti), which is to serve low-grade persons
like śūdras. Brāhmaṇas should be well acquainted with all Vedic knowledge, and kṣatriyas
should be well acquainted with the worship of devatās.
Brāhmaṇas and kṣatriyas should not engage in low service of śūdras, because a brāhmaṇa
is equivalent to the Vedas and a kṣatriya is equivalent to the devatās. However for vaiśyas
and śūdras to take employment from those lower than themselves is not so faulty.
Kali-yuga is filled with śūdra population that has given up the cultivation of spiritual life.
This is an emergency situation. Therefore it is now time to train people to become
brāhmaṇas and take up the work of spiritual progress.
21-24: Symptoms of the four varṇas
21. The symptoms of a brāhmaṇa
śamo damas tapaḥ śaucaṁ   Mind control, sense control, austerity, cleanliness,
santoṣaḥ kṣāntir ārjavam satisfaction, forgiveness, simplicity,
jñānaṁ dayācyutātmatvaṁ   knowledge, mercy, complete surrender to Lord Acyuta,
satyaṁ ca brahma-lakṣaṇam  and truthfulness are the symptoms of a brāhmaṇa.
22. The symptoms of a kṣatriya
śauryaṁ vīryaṁ dhṛtis tejas   Bravery in battle, unconquerable, patience, challenging,
tyāgaś cātmajayaḥ kṣamā      charitable, controlling the bodily necessities, forgiving,
brahmaṇyatā prasādaś ca      faithfulness to brahminical principles, always joyful,
satyaṁ ca kṣatra-lakṣaṇam     and truthful—these are the symptoms of the kṣatriya.
23. The symptoms of a vaiśya
deva-gurv-acyute bhaktis      Devotion to devatās, spiritual master and Lord Viṣṇu
tri-varga-paripoṣaṇam        endeavoring for advancement in dharma, artha and
kāma,
āstikyam udyamo nityaṁ        believing in the words of spiritual master and scripture,
naipuṇyaṁ vaiśya-lakṣaṇam      expertise in earning money—are the symptoms of vaiśya.
24. The symptoms of a śūdra
śūdrasya sannatiḥ śaucaṁ        Obedience to the higher three castes, cleanliness,
sevā svāminy amāyayā          service to master without duplicity,
amantra-yajño hy asteyaṁ        doing sacrifices without uttering mantras, not stealing,
satyaṁ go-vipra-rakṣaṇam        truthfulness and protecting cows and brāhmaṇas.
25-29: DUTIES OF A CHASTE WIFE
25-28. The duties of a chaste wife are –
To serve the husband with love and affection, according to time and circumstance
To be favorably disposed toward the husband
To be equally disposed toward the husband’s relatives and friends
To follow the vows of the husband
To dress and decorate nicely for husband’s pleasure
To keep the house clean and pure
To be modest, truthful and attentive
To control her senses
To speak sweet words
Should not be greedy
Expert in handling household affairs
Should be fully conversant with religious principles
The basic principle for a chaste woman is to be always favorably disposed toward her
husband. When there are no fights between husband and wife, the goddess of fortune
Lakṣmī automatically comes home.
29. Result: A woman who serves her husband following the footsteps of Lakṣmī, surely returns
back to Godhead, with her devotee husband, and lives happily in Vaikuṇṭha.
A fallen husband is one who is addicted to meat-eating, gambling, intoxication and illicit
sex. A chaste wife should not associate with such a fallen husband. Similarly, a husband
can separate himself from a woman who is not chaste as per the description of the śāstra.
Conclusion: A husband should be a pure Vaiṣṇava and a woman should be a chaste wife
with the above qualities. Then both of them will be happy and make spiritual progress. A
woman should serve her husband as faithfully as Lakṣmī serves Nārāyaṇa; that is ideal. A
man should be an ideal servant of the Lord, and a woman should be an ideal wife like the
goddess of fortune.
30-35: DUTIES OF THE MIXED CLASSES AND RESULT OF OCCUPATIONAL DUTIES
Antyaja or mixed classes are those who marry a woman of higher or lower castes. They
of two types – (i) If a woman of a high caste marries a man of a lower caste, their union is
called pratiloma. (ii) If a woman of a low caste marries a man of a higher caste, their
union is called anuloma.
The members of such dynasties have their traditional duties as barbers, washermen and so
on. Among the antyajas, those who are still somewhat pure in that they do not steal and are
not addicted to meat-eating, drinking, illicit sex and gambling are called antevasāyī.
30. Antevasāyī or caṇḍālas (dog-eaters) are not thieves and are not sinful in conduct. They also
have their hereditary customs.
31. Acting as per nature: In every yuga, an occupation according to one’s nature (svabhāva)
generally brings happiness in this life and after death. This is the opinion of experts in Vedas.
It is better to perform one’s own prescribed duty, though inferior, than the duties of others
(See Bhagavad-gīta 3.35).
According to the symptoms of higher and lower sections of society, there are different
varieties of occupational duties. For example, if a tiger kills a man this is not sinful, but if a
man kills another man this is sinful. What is a daily affair among the animals is a sinful act
in human society. The antyajas are accustomed to stealing, drinking and illicit sex, but that
is not considered sinful.
32. Result: If one acts according to one’s nature and gradually gives up those activities, he
gradually attains the niṣkāma stage (freedom from material desires) beyond the material modes
(nirguṇatām).
33-34. Overindulgence as solution: If an agricultural field is cultivated repeatedly, it becomes
unsuitable for germinating seeds. Just as drops of ghee on a fire never extinguish the fire but a
flood of ghee will, overindulgence in lusty desires mitigates such desires entirely.
35. Varṇa is based on qualities, not birth
yasya yal lakṣaṇaṁ proktaṁ puṁso   If one shows the symptoms of being a brāhmaṇa,
varṇābhivyañjakam          kṣatriya, vaiśya or śūdra, as described above,
yad anyatrāpi dṛśyeta        even if one is born in a different class,
tat tenaiva vinirdiśet      one should be designated according to those symptoms.
7.12 THE PERFECT SOCIETY: FOUR SPIRITUAL
CLASSES
In 7.11.2, Yudhiṣṭhira asked Nārada Muni about varṇāśrama. Nārada described the varṇas in
7.11. Now onwards he will describe āśramas. In 7.12, Nārada describes the brahmacārī and
vānaprastha āśramas. In 7.13, he describes sannyāsa āśrama. In 7.14-15, he describes gṛhastha
āśrama.
1-16: DUTIES OF A BRAHMACĀRĪ
1-5: General duties of a brahmacārī student living in guru-kula
Practicing complete sense control (dānta)
Acting only for the benefit of guru (guror hitam)
Submissiveness to guru like a servant (dāsavan nīco)
Attitude of firm friendship for the guru (gurau sudṛḍha-sauhṛdaḥ)
brahmacārī guru-kule vasan dānto guror hitam
ācaran dāsavan nīco gurau sudṛḍha-sauhṛdaḥ
Worshiping guru, fire, sun and Viṣṇu, early in the morning and the evening
(sandhyas) while silently and attentively chanting the gāyatrī mantra.
Being called by the guru, he should study the Vedic mantras regularly.
Daily before and after studies, he should offer respects unto the guru’s feet.
Should dress in deerskin garments, a belt of straw, sacred thread, matted locks, and
carry a pure kuśa grass, a rod, water pot.
Collect alms in the morning and evening and offer it the guru.
Eat only if ordered by the guru, otherwise fast.
6-10: A brahmacārī’s conduct and dealings with women
6. Conduct of a brahmacārī
suśīlo mita-bhug dakṣaḥ          Well behaved, control on his eating, industrious,
śraddadhāno jitendriyaḥ          faithful to instructions of guru and śāstra, sense
controlled,
yāvad-arthaṁ vyavaharet strīṣu strī- interact with women or men controlled by women only
nirjiteṣu ca              as much as necessary
7. Brahmacārī’s interactions with women
varjayet pramadā-gāthām agṛhastho One who has not accepted the gṛhastha-āśrama, must
bṛhad-vrataḥ          rigidly avoid talking with women or about women,
indriyāṇi pramāthīni      for the senses are so powerful that
haranty api yater manaḥ     they may agitate even the mind of a sannyāsī.
8. A young brahmacārī should not allow the young wife of guru (if guru is married) to care for
his hair, massage his body, or bathe him with motherly affection.
9. Why so much precaution about associating with women?
nanv agniḥ pramadā nāma          Woman is compared to fire, and
ghṛta-kumbha-samaḥ pumān          man is compared to a butter pot.
sutām api raho jahyād          So, a man should avoid associating even with his own
daughter in a secluded place.
anyadā yāvad-artha-kṛt          One should associate with any women only for important
business, even if one is not alone.
10. As long as one is not self-realized, he cannot be relieved from bodily conception, which is
epitomized by the duality between man and woman. Thus there is every chance of one’s fall
down due to bewildered intelligence.
11-16: Further details of brahmacārī āśrama
11. Applicable to others also: These principles (described in 7.12.6-10) apply equally to
gṛhasthas and sannyāsīs. The gṛhastha, however, is given permission by the guru to have sex for
procreation.
12. Forbidden items: Those who have taken the vow of celibacy (bṛhat-vrata) should not apply
ointments, massage the body or head, see a woman, eat meat, drink wine etc.
13-14. Training and graduation: One who is twice-born should reside in the guru-kula under
the care of guru and study the scriptures as per one’s ability. The disciple should offer
remuneration the guru requests, and following the guru’s order, accept gṛhastha, vānaprastha or
sannyāsa āśramas or remain there as a naiṣṭhika-brahmacārī.
Studying the scriptures is compulsory for everyone but the śūdras and antyajas. The
scriptures lead one to understand the Absolute Truth—Brahman, Paramātmā or Bhagavān.
It is not compulsory for a brahmacārī to become a gṛhastha. Because the ultimate aim is
to understand the Absolute Truth, there is no necessity of going through all the different
āśramas. One may proceed to the sannyāsa-āśrama directly from the brahmacārī-āśrama.
15-16. One should realize the omnipresence of the Supreme Lord in the fire, in the guru, in
one’s self and in all living entities. The Lord is all-pervading, externally and internally as the
controller of everything.
16. Result: One can understand the Absolute Truth and attain Him, by practicing in this way, in
one of the āśramas.
17-31: DUTIES OF A VĀNAPRASTHA
17. Result of practicing vānaprastha: By rigidly following the rules of vānaprastha, one who
has retired from family life, one can easily be elevated to Maharloka.
18-23: General duties of a vānaprastha
Should not eat grains grown by tilling of the fields.
Should not eat unripe grains that have grown without tilling of the field.
Should not eat grains cooked in fire.
Should eat only fruit ripened by the sunshine.
Should offer in sacrifice cakes made from fruits and grains grown naturally.
Should give up old stock of grains when he obtains some new grains.
Should make a thatched cottage or stay in a cave only to keep the sacred fire.
Should practice enduring snowfall, wind, fire, rain and the heat of the sun.
Should wear matted locks and let his body hair, nails and moustache grow.
Should not cleanse his body of dirt.
Should keep waterpot, deerskin and rod, wear tree bark, and fire-color clothes.
Should remain in forest for 12 years, 8 years, 4 years, 2 years or at least 1 year.
Should not be disturbed by too much austerity.
Should fast when unable to perform prescribed duties due to disease or oldage.
In the previous verse (7.12.23), a vānaprastha is recommended to fast when he is unable to
perform asuterities. The rest of the chapter describes the actions one should do before fasting. [In
the below section “→” indicates “is / are merged into”]
24-31: Rules for giving up body for a vānaprastha
24-25. Merging of the gross body: One should place the fire element in oneself, give up bodily
identification and gradually merge the various parts of the gross body into the five material
elements which are their sources (causes) as listed below.
The bodily holes → Sky
Breathing → Air
Bodily heat → Fire
Semen, blood and mucus → Water
Hard substances like skin, muscle and bone → Earth
The material body is nothing but a combination of the five elements (earth, water, fire, air and
sky). Knowledge of this constitutes merging of the body and the five elements. Merging
into Brahman in perfect knowledge means understanding perfectly that one is not the body
but a spiritual soul.
26-28. Merging of the subtle body
Object of speech and tongue → Fire
Craftsmanship and hands → Indra
Power of movement and legs → Lord Viṣṇu
Sensual pleasure and genitals → Prajāpati
Rectum and power of evacuation → Mṛtyu
Ear and sound vibration→ deities of directions
Skin and objects of touch → Vāyu
Eyes and form → Sun
Tongue and Varuṇa → Water
Smell and Aśvinī-kumāras → Earth
Mind and material desires → Moon
Intelligence and its objects → Brahmā
False ego (bodily identity) and material activities → Rudra
Material consciousness and goal of thought → living being/ Vāsudeva
Devatās and perverted jīva → Supreme Being
Earth → water → fire → air → sky → false ego → mahat-tattva (total material energy)
pradhāna (unmanifested ingredients) → Supersoul
31. Only the soul remains: When the material body is thus returned to its various material
elements, only the indestructible spiritual being remains. He gives up material existence, like fire
whose wood has been burned away.
In the previous chapter, Nārada Muni described the duties of brahmacārī and vānaprastha. In
this chapter, he describes the conduct of the sannyāsī through a conversation between Prahlāda
with a renounced person.
1-10: QUALITIES OF A SANNYĀSĪ
1-3: Conduct of a sannyāsī
Detached, merely keeping the body inhabitable
Not dependent on anything material (nirapekṣaḥ)
Travels on earth, passing only one night in a village (parivrajya)
If he wears, he wears only a loincloth and an outer covering
When there is no necessity, he should not even accept a daṇḍa
Should wander alone (eka eva cared)
Should live on alms begged (bhikṣu)
Completely satisfied in the self (ātmārāmo)
Not dependent on any person or any place (anapāśrayaḥ)
A well-wisher to all living beings (sarva-bhūta-suhṛt)
Peaceful (śānto)
Completely surrendered to Lord Nārāyaṇa (nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇaḥ)
4-6: Consciousness of a sannyāsī
Sees the Supreme Lord (beyond cause and effect) pervading everything
Sees everything (composed of cause and effect) resting on the Supreme Lord
Understands the self during deep sleep, dreaming and waking states
Realizes that bondage and liberation are actually illusory (māyā-mātraṁ).
Observes the power of time, that causes appearance and disappearance of all
beings, instead of praising the uncertain life or death.
7-10: Other qualities of a sannyāsī
7. Teaching and arguments: Literature without spiritual benefit should be rejected. One should
not become a professional teacher nor indulge in arguments and take sides.
nāsac-chāstreṣu sajjeta nopajīveta jīvikām
vāda-vādāṁs tyajet tarkān pakṣaṁ kaṁca na saṁśrayet
8a. Disciples: He must not present material allurements to gather many disciples.
8b. Books: He should not read many books or give discourses as a means of livelihood.
8c. Temples: He should not attempt to build many temples or increase material opulence.
The first business of the sannyāsī is to preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness, but if, by the grace of
Kṛṣṇa, facilities are available, then he may construct temples to give shelter to the serious
students of bhakti.
9. Paramahaṁsa stage: A spiritually advanced person, who is peaceful and equipoised, does
not need to accept the symbols of a sannyāsī (like tridaṇḍa or kamaṇḍalu). As per necessity he
sometimes accepts and sometimes rejects them.
10. Evident purpose: Although he may not expose himself, by his behavior his purpose is
disclosed. Although he is the greatest orator or poet, he externally presents himself like a dumb
man or a child.
Nārada Muni further describes the behavior of such a saintly person by narrating a
conversation that happenned between Prahlāda Mahārāja and an avadhūta brāhmaṇa.
11-46: CONVERSATION BETWEEN PRAHLĀDA AND AN AVADHŪTA BRĀHMAṆA
11-20: Prahlāda Mahārāja meets a brāhmaṇa and inquires from him
11-13. Sages recite a historical example on this. Once on Sahya Mountain, Prahlāda Mahārāja
met a saintly person lying on the ground, covered with dust, feeding himself like a python
(ājagara-vṛtti). By his activities, bodily features, words, people could not understand whether he
was some person they knew.
15. Prahlāda, an advanced devotee, duly worshiped that saintly person touching his feet with
head. He then inquired from him very submissively as follows.
Prahlāda studied the bodily features of the saintly person, and understood that he was
intelligent and expert, although he was lying down and not doing anything. Prahlāda was
naturally inquisitive about why he was lying there inactive.
16-19. Prahlāda asked the saint, “You do not work to earn your livelihood, but you have a
stout body, like that of a materialistic enjoyer. You have no money for sense enjoyment. How
then has your body become so fat? You appear learned and intelligent, yet you lie down inactive,
looking at people doing actions with disgust.”
20. Captivated by Prahlāda’s sweet words, the saintly person replied with a smile.
21-23: The brāhmaṇa glorifies Prahlāda Mahārāja
21. You have spiritual vision: O best of demons, you are respected by advanced men (ārya-
sattama). You are aware of the different stages of life and by your inner spiritual vision
(adhyāma-cakṣūṣā), you can see a man’s character and the results of his actions.
In the next verse, the saintly brāhamṇa reveals that the cause of Prahlāda’s knowledge is his
unalloyed bhakti (unmixed with fruitive acts or speculative knowledge) towards Kṛṣṇa.
22. Because of your pure devotion (bhaktyā kevalayā) to Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa, He is
predominant in your heart. He always drives away ignorance, as the sun drives away the
darkness of the universe.
23. Although you know everything, you asked some questions. I shall answer you (though I
have taken a vow of silence, I shall break it), according to what I have heard from authorities
(not concocted), for my self-purification.
24-34: The brāhmaṇa describes the futility of material happiness
24. Desires cause transmigration: Due to insatiable material desires (tṛṣṇayā), I was being
carried by waves of material nature’s laws (bhava-vāhinyā), acting in different ways (karmāṇi),
struggling for existence in various species (nana-yoniṣu).
25. Human life is a junction: In the course of such evolution in species by my karma, I have
attained this human life, which can elevate one to heaven (svarga) or liberation (apavarga), or
degrade one to lower species or rebirth as a human (tiraścām punar asya).
Material life is called ‘pavarga’ because here we are subject to five different states of
suffering, represented by the letters pa, pha, ba, bha and ma.
Pa means pariśrama or hard labor
Pha means phena or foam from mouth due to labor
Ba means byarthatā, disappointment despite hard labor
Bha means bhaya or fear due to not knowing what will happen next
Ma means mṛtyu or death
One attains ‘apavarga’ or liberation from the material existence when one attempts to
nullify these five different statuses of life (pavarga).
26-27. I abandoned material acts because I saw that a man and a woman unite for pleasure in
sex, but they actually do not become happy. Material sense enjoyment is simply an imagination.
Spiritual happiness is real happiness, and it can be achieved only when one stops all materialistic
activities.
tatrāpi dam-patīnāṁ ca sukhāyānyāpanuttaye
karmāṇi kurvatāṁ dṛṣṭvā nivṛtto 'smi viparyayam [26]
One cannot simply cease from materialistic activity and remain inactive for long. One
should engage in spiritual activities (according to the orders of Lord Kṛṣṇa), which will
solve the problem of suffering.
28. Forgetfulness leads to misery: The conditioned soul forgets his self-interest (his eternal
relationship with Kṛṣṇa) due to bodily identification. Attracted by the varieties of the material
world, he suffers.
As Kṛṣṇa is always happy, the living entities, who are His parts and parcels, are also happy
by nature, but because of being put within this material world and forgetting their eternal
relationship with Kṛṣṇa, they suffer.
29-30. Futile search for happiness: Just as a deer cannot see the water within a covered well,
but runs after a mirage, the conditioned soul does not see happiness within oneself, but runs for it
elsewhere. But because the various material bodies are under the control of material nature, all of
one’s plans are ultimately baffled.
When one understands one’s real identity as a spiritual being, he can understand Kṛṣṇa,
the supreme spiritual being, and the real happiness exchanged between Kṛṣṇa and oneself.
31. Futility of enjoyable objects: For a person not free from threefold miseries, who can
suddenly die, what is the use of attaining objects of enjoyment with great difficulty?
32-33. A rich man’s insecurity: A rich man, who is a victim of senses, is greedy to accumulate
wealth, but suffers from insomnia due to fear of government laws, thieves, enemies, family
members, animals, beggars, time factor and even his ownself.
34. An intelligent person should give up desire for prestige and money, which is the cause of
lamentation, illusion, fear, anger, attachment, poverty, unnecessary labor etc.
śoka-moha-bhaya-krodha- rāga-klaibya-śramādayaḥ
yan-mūlāḥ syur nṛṇāṁ jahyāt spṛhāṁ prāṇārthayor budhaḥ
35-37: The two gurus of the brāhmaṇa
35. The bee and the python are two excellent gurus who give us instructions on – satisfaction
(paritoṣam) and renunciation (vairāgyam).
36. The bee teaches detachment from material desires (virāgaḥ sarva-kāmebhyaḥ) and
accumulating money. Just as the honey accumulated by a bee is taken away by force, anyone can
kill a person who own’s money and take it away.
37. The python teaches satisfaction (parituṣṭātmā), and not desiring to possess more (anīhaḥ)
but take whatever is achieved in its own way (yadṛcchopanatād). If I do not get anything, I am
unagitated like a python.
38-41: Lifestyle of avadhūta brāhmaṇa
38. Eating habits: I eat whatever is easily available – small quantity, great quantity, palatable
food, stale food, offered with respect, given neglectfully, during the day or night and so on.
39. Dressing habits: I wear whatever is available according to my destiny – linen, silk, cotton,
bark or deerskin.
40. Sleeping habits: I lie down wherever possible – on earth, on leaves, grass or stone, on a pile
of ashes, or in a palace.
The brāhmaṇa's description here indicates different types of births, for one lies down
according to one's body. For example, an animal lies down on the ground, and a king or a
rich man sleeps in huge palaces.
41. Travels: Sometimes I bathe nicely, decorate with sandalwood pulp, fine garments, garland
and ornaments, and travel like a king on an elephant, chariot or horse. Sometimes, however, I
travel naked, like a haunted person.
42-46: Giving up the material body and self-realization
42. Avoiding false discrimination and being a well-wisher
nāhaṁ ninde na ca staumi    I do not praise or criticize people
sva-bhāva-viṣamaṁ janam     who have different mentalities.
eteṣāṁ śreya āśāse      I only desire their welfare, hoping that
utaikātmyaṁ mahātmani      they will agree to become one with the Supersoul.
43-44. Fighting false discrimination: Discrimination (vikalpa) → consciousness (citta) → mind
(manasa, the root of all acceptance and rejection) → false ego → total material energy (māyā)7 .
A thoughtful person should retire from all illusory material activities being situated in self-
realization.
45. I have described my history of self-realization to you, O Prahlāda, because you are a self-
realized soul and a devotee (bhagavat-paraḥ). You do not care for public opinion or so-called
scriptures.
46. Prahlāda Mahārāja understood the occupational duties of a paramahaṁsa. Prahlāda duly
worshiped the saint and departed with his permission.
7 “→” indicates “should be offered into”
7.14 IDEAL FAMILY LIFE
Having described the three āśramas of renunciation, Nārada Muni now explains the path of
the householder (gṛhastha) engaged in worldly activity according to time and place.
1-18: DUTIES OF A GṚHASTHA
1. King Yudhiṣṭhira asked Nārada Muni: “Please explain how we, who are staying at home
without knowledge of the goal of life, may also easily attain liberation.”
Nārada Muni replied to Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira as follows:
2. Dedication to Kṛṣṇa: Householders must act to earn their livelihood, but they should offer
the results to Kṛṣṇa and worship great devotees.
3. Hearing about Kṛṣṇa: With faith, one should constantly hear the nectar of Supreme Lord’s
activities in various incarnations (avatāra-kathāmṛtam).
4. Developing detachment: By hearing in good association (sat-sanga), one gradually becomes
detached from family affection, exactly like a man awakening from a dream.
5. Neutrality and frugality: He should earn only as much as required, should live unattached to
family affairs, although externally appearing very much attached.
6. Simplicity and diplomacy: He should keep life simple. He may externally agree to the
suggestions of relatives, but internally determined not to create a cumbersome life.
7. Responsibilities and resources: An intelligent householder must perform his daily and
occassional duties, by utilizing whatever is created by the Supreme Lord (acyutanirmitam), and
that comes from – (i) divyam or sky: like rainfall (ii) bhaumam or earth: like mines and fields and
(iii) āntarikṣam or atmosphere: obtained unexpectedly.
8. Avoiding greed: One may claim proprietorship to as much wealth as required to maintain
body and soul together, but one who desires more is a thief (stena) and deserves to be punished
(daṇḍam arhati) by the laws of nature.
9. Equal vision: One should treat animals, birds and flies exactly like one’s own sons.
Like children, the unintelligent animals are also sons of the Supreme Lord. Therefore a
Kṛṣṇa conscious person should not discriminate between them. Human society should not
consider itself the only enjoyer of all the properties of God; animals also have a claim.
10. Don’t hanker for tri-vargas: Even if one is a householder, one should not endeavor very
hard for dharma, artha and kāma, and be satisfied with whatever is available with minimum
endeavor, according to place and time, by the Lord’s grace.
11. Maintaining others: A householder should contribute for the maintenance of even dogs,
fallen persons and untouchables. Even one’s wife should be engaged in receiving guests.
12. Detachment to wife: One is so possessive about his wife, that he sometimes kills himself,
his parents or even guru for her sake. If one can give up his attachment to such a wife, he
conquers the unconquerable Supreme Lord.
13. By deliberation, one must give up attraction to his wife’s insignificant body, which will be
ultimately transformed into worms (if buried), stool (if disposed) or ashes (if burned). What
value is the wife in comparison to the all-pervading Lord?
kṛmi-viḍ-bhasma-niṣṭhāntaṁ kvedaṁ tucchaṁ kalevaram
kva tadīya-ratir bhāryā kvāyam ātmā nabhaś-chadiḥ
14. One should be satisfied with eating prasāda or with performing the pañca-sūnā (five kinds
of sacrifices). By this, one can give up material attachment and be fixed in the position of a
mahātmā.
15. Worshiping all: One should worship the devatās, humans, sages, forefathers, living entities
and one’s self, by the wealth acquired through one’s occupation. Thus one is able to worship the
Supreme Lord.
16. Performing sacrifices: When one has wealth for gathering all items, one must perform
sacrifice according to śāstric rules and thus worship the Supreme Lord.
Ultimately all the scriptures are meant to satisfy the Supreme Lord (See BG 3.9). It was
possible in Tretā-yuga to perform costly yajñas. The same goal can be achieved in Kali-
yuga by performing saṅkīrtana-yajña, or chanting the holy names of the Lord.
One should also not be too attached to performing sacrifices. Worshiping the brāhmaṇas is a
greater way of worshiping the Supreme Lord.
17-18. Feeding brāhmaṇas first: Although the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa enjoys offerings in
sacrificial fire (agni-mukha), He is more satisfied when nice food is offered to Him through the
mouths of brāhmaṇas (vipra-mukha). Therefore first offer prasāda unto the brāhmaṇas and the
devatās, and then distribute prasāda to other living entities.
19-33: THE TIMES AND PLACES SUITABLE FOR RELIGIOUS ACTIVITIES
19-26: Kāla – The auspicious times to perform religious acts
19. A rich brāhmaṇa must offer oblations to –
forefathers – during the dark-moon fortnight in the Bhādra month.
relatives of forefathers – during the mahālayā ceremonies in the Āśvina month.
20-23. One should perform the śrāddha ceremony on the days of Makara-saṅkrānti, Karkaṭa-
saṅkrānti, Meṣa-saṅkrānti, Tulā-saṅkrānti, Akṣaya-tṛtīyā day, days conjoined with one's own
birth star (janma-nakṣatra) and so on.
24-26. Benefits of such auspicious times (for any religious activity)
Brings success in one’s short duration of life
Yields a permanently beneficial result, if one bathes in a sacred river, chants, offers fire
sacrifices and worships the Lord at such times
One flourishes in fruitive activities
27-33: Deśa – Places suitable for spiritual activities
27-29. Religious performances are well executed at places where –
Vaiṣṇavas are available
Deity of the Supreme Lord is worshiped
Learned brāhmaṇas observe Vedic principles by austerity, education and mercy
Sacred rivers flow
Anything spiritual done there is certainly very effective.
yatra yatra harer arcā sa deśaḥ śreyasāṁ padam
yatra gaṅgādayo nadyaḥ purāṇeṣu ca viśrutāḥ
Any place where the Deity is worshiped is transcendental; it does not belong to the
material world. The forest may be in goodness, the cities and villages in passion, and the
brothels, hotels and restaurants in ignorance, but when one lives in the temple community
and worships the Deity following the principles, he lives in Vaikuṇṭha.
30-33. Holy places, meant for spiritual advancement
Sacred lakes like Puṣkara
Places where devotees live: Kurukṣetra, Gayā, Prayāga, Pulahāśrama, Naimiṣāraṇya,
Setubandha, Prabhāsa, Dvārakā, Vārāṇasī, Mathurā, Badarikāśrama, Bindu-sarovara etc.
Places where Rāma and Sītā stayed: Citrakūṭa, hilly tracts of Mahendra and Malaya.
Places outside India where Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Deities are worshiped.
One who desires spiritual advancement may visit these places. Acts performed in these places
give a thousand times more result than at other places.
Whenever we perform some religious act, we must do it according to the time (kāla), place
(deśa) and person (pātra). Nārada Muni has decribed about kāla and deśa so far. Now he will
describe, to whom everything must be offered.
34. Kṛṣṇa is the best recipient of all offerings: Experts decided that only the Supreme Lord
Kṛṣṇa, in whom all that is moving or nonmoving is resting, is the best person to whom
everything must be given.
Kṛṣṇa is the root of everything, and therefore He is the best pātra, or person, to whom
everything must be given (See Bg 5.29 and SB 4.31.14).
35-36. Why only Kṛṣṇa? – At the Rājasūya sacrifice, although many devatās and sages were
present, when there was a question of who should be worshiped first, everyone decided that
Kṛṣṇa is the most qualified. The entire universe is like a tree, whose root is Kṛṣṇa. Simply by
worshiping Him one can worship all living entities.
37-38. Paramātma: The Lord has created many bodies (species) and resides in all of them as the
Supersoul. The Supersoul is manifested to the individual soul according to the individual’s
development of knowledge, austerity and so on.
Gradations of bodily forms: The Supersoul gives intelligence to the individual soul as far
as he is able to grasp it (See BG 15.15). Therefore we find the souls in different high and
low positions. A living entity with the body of a bird or beast cannot take instructions from
the Supreme Soul as adequately as an advanced human being.
39. Deity worship was introduced when great sages saw people disrespectful (avajña) to each
other (i.e., not respecting the Lord in all beings, specifically other devotees), at the beginning of
Tretā-yuga.
40. Neophyte devotees (prākṛta-bhakta, or kaniṣṭha-adhikārī) faithfully worship the Lord’s
Deity with all paraphernalia, but are envious of other devotees. The Lord is never satisfied with
their service.
For the neophytes who cannot properly appreciate the activities of authorized devotees,
Deity worship is the only way for purification and spiritual advancement.
Having described that Lord Kṛṣṇa is the first and best receipent (su-pātra) of all offerigs,
Nārada Muni will now describe that Kṛṣṇa’s devotees are also the best receipents (su-pātra).
41. A qualified brāhmaṇa must be accepted as the best in the world. Because of his austerity,
Vedic studies and satisfaction, he becomes the counterpart body of the Lord.
A Vaiṣṇava is superior to a brāhmaṇa. A brāhmaṇa knows that he is Brahman, but a
Vaiṣṇava knows that he is not only Brahman but also an eternal servant of the Supreme
Brahman. Therefore, worship of a Vaiṣṇava is superior to worship of the Deity.
42. Even Kṛṣṇa worships the brāhmaṇas who purify the three worlds with their dust and
preach the Lord’s glories.
nanv asya brāhmaṇā rājan kṛṣṇasya jagad-ātmanaḥ
punantaḥ pāda-rajasā tri-lokīṁ daivataṁ mahat
Reciprocal relationship: The brāhmaṇas want to worship Kṛṣṇa, and similarly Kṛṣṇa
wants to worship the brāhmaṇas. Although a brāhmaṇa or Vaiṣṇava is worshiped like the
Lord, he remains His faithful servant and never tries to enjoy such prestige.
7.15 INSTRUCTIONS FOR CIVILIZED HUMAN BEINGS
In this chapter, Nārada Muni continues to describe the path of gṛhasthas and concludes the
discussion with a summary.
In the previous chapter the superiority of the brāhmaṇa was described. Now Nārada Muni
describes the gradation among the brāhmaṇas in different āśramas.
1-11: RULES FOR VEDIC RITUALS AND TRANSCENDING THEM
1. Gradation of brāhmaṇas
i. Karma-niṣṭha – Gṛhasthas, who are devoted to performing rituals
ii. Tapo-niṣṭha – Vānaprasthas, who are devoted to austerity
iii. Svādhyāya-niṣṭha – Brahmacārīs, who are devoted to studying and preaching Vedas
iv. Jñāna-niṣṭha – Sannyāsīs, who are devoted to culturing knowledge and bhakti
The latter are superior to the former in the list.
2. Whom to give charity? – A person desiring liberation for oneself or one’s ancestors, should
give charity to a jñāna-niṣṭha brāhmaṇa (sannyāsī). In his absence, charity may be given to other
brāhmaṇas like the karma-niṣṭhas.
Rules for devotees: Those practicing pure bhakti need not perform karmas like this, i.e.,
they need not find a jñāna-niṣṭha or a karma-niṣṭha brāhmaṇa to give charity. Charity
should be given to a devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa, even if he is not a brāhmaṇa. One who
desires mukti worships jñānīs, and one who desires prema worships pure devotees.
But gṛhastha devotees still perform these acts of karma through appointed
representatives, to preserve the normal social standards (Examples: Kings like Bharata and
Ambarīṣa).
3. Inviting brāhmaṇas while offering oblations to –
devatās → invite only two brāhmaṇas
forefathers → invite three brāhmaṇas
In either case, only one brāhmaṇa will also suffice. Even if one is opulent, he should not
endeavor to invite more brāhmaṇas or make expensive arrangements.
4. No need to invite more: If one arranges to feed many brāhmaṇas during the śrāddha
ceremony, there will be discrepancies in the time, place, respectability, ingredients etc.
5-6. One should offer prasāda of the Deity (muni-annam) to a suitable Vaiṣṇava or brāhmaṇa,
at an auspicious time and place. This will cause everlasting benefit. One should offer prasāda to
the devatās, sages, forefathers, relatives and others, seeing them as devotees of the Supreme
Lord.
Muni-annam is forest food or food gained by proper means. It should first be offered to
Lord Viṣṇu. Then it is given to the Pitṛs and other suitable persons.
7. One should never offer meat, eggs or fish in the śrāddha ceremony if he is aware of religious
principles (dharma-tattvavit). The Lord is pleased with preparations of ghee for the devotees
(muni-anna), and is not pleased when animals are killed (paśu-hiṁsayā).
8. Giving up violence and envy towards all beings by mind, words and body, is the highest
dharma, for those who desire to advance in superior religion.
naitādṛśaḥ paro dharmo nṛṇāṁ sad-dharmam icchatām
nyāso daṇḍasya bhūteṣu mano-vāk-kāyajasya yaḥ
9. Giving up sacrifices: Persons advanced in knowledge (jñānīs) know well about sacrifice
(yajña-vittama) and are free from material desires (anīha). They control the self (ātma-
saṁyamana), illuminated by spiritual knowledge (jñāna-dīpite), and give up sacrifices that result
in reactions (karmamayān yajñān).
10. The animals become afraid seeing the person doing sacrifice (dravya-yajña). They think,
“This merciless performer of sacrifices, being ignorant of the purpose of sacrifice and being most
satisfied by killing others, will surely kill us.”
11. Simple offerings: One, who is actually aware of dharma (dharma-vit) and is not cruel,
should do his daily and occasional duties (nitya-naimittikīḥ kriyāḥ) with whatever food is
available easily by the grace of the Lord (daivopapannena).
12-21: AVOIDING IRRELIGION AND CULTIVATING SATISFACTION
12. The knower of dharma should avoid five brnches of adharma or irreligion.
13-14: Five types of adharma (irreligion)
i      Vidharma: Irreligion  Obstructs the execution of one’s own dharma, although
one considers it dharma.
ii    Para-dharma: Imitating Introduced by someone else, or performing another
religion Irreligion person’s duties unfit to oneself.
Ābhāsa-dharma:      Whimsically worshiping some devatā by imagination and
iii
Pretentious religion willfully neglecting one’s prescribed duties.
iv          Upadharma:        Created by a proud person who opposes Vedic
Concocted religion  principles, though posing himself as a follower of Vedas.
Chala-dharma: Cheating Misinterpreting the scriptures by word jugglery.
v
religion
15. Desirelessness: Even a poor man shouldn’t strive to improve his economic condition or to
become a famous religionist. One who is desireless (anīha) also obtains his livelihood without
endeavour, just like a python (ājagara-vṛtti).
16. Self-satisfaction Vs. Greed
santuṣṭasya nirīhasya              One who is content, desireless (doesn’t strive for
livelihood)
svātmārāmasya yat sukham            and satisfied within oneself enjoys divine happiness.
kutas tat kāma-lobhena            Where is such happiness for a lust and greedy person?
dhāvato 'rthehayā diśaḥ           He wanders in all directions desiring to accumulate
wealth.
17. Self-satisfied people are most happy
sadā santuṣṭa-manasaḥ     For one whose mind is always satisfied
sarvāḥ śivamayā diśaḥ     there is happiness everywhere (he has no distress).
śarkarā-kaṇṭakādibhyo     There is no danger even if one walks on pebbles and
thorns,
yathopānat-padaḥ śivam     if he has suitable shoes. For him, everything is
auspicious.
18. Self-satisfied person Vs. Sense-gratifier
santuṣṭaḥ kena vā rājan na vartetāpi O King! Why can’t a self-satisfied person be happy with
vāriṇā                drinking only water?
aupasthya-jaihvya-kārpaṇyād gṛha- One who is driven by tongue and genitals, must accept
pālāyate janaḥ            the position of a household dog to satisfy his senses.
19. An unsatisfied brāhmaṇa, greedy for senses, gradually loses his spiritual strength,
education, austerity, reputation and knowledge.
20. Insatiable greed (cause of dissatisfaction)
kāmasyāntaṁ hi kṣut-tṛḍbhyāṁ      Needs of hunger and thirst are satisfied when one eats.
krodhasyaitat phalodayāt       Anger is satisfied by chastisement and its reaction.
jano yāti na lobhasya jitvā bhuktvā But one’s greed is not satisfied, even by conquering all
diśo bhuvaḥ             the directions or enjoying everything in the world.
21. Dissatisfaction leads to fall down: Many scholars, legal advisers, leaders of assemblies fall
down into hellish life because of not being satisfied with their positions.
Material greed and spiritual progress: For spiritual advancement, one should be
materially satisfied, otherwise, one’s greed for material development will result in the
frustration of one’s spiritual advancement. Good qualifications are lost due to two things:
(i) poverty and (ii) greed. Therefore one should not be so poverty-stricken, but one must
try to be satisfied with the bare necessities of life and not be greedy.
Speiritual greed: Greed for propagating kṛṣṇa-bhakti and satisfying Kṛṣṇa is spiritual.
Having mentioned about the obstacles (anarthas) in spiritual progress, Nārada Muni now
explains how to overcome such obstacles.
22-25a: How to conquer anarthas
i     asaṅkalpāj jayet kāmaṁ Lust → by being determined not to have sex
ii   krodhaṁ kāma-vivarjanāt Anger → by giving up the objective of sense desire
iii   arthānarthekṣayā lobhaṁ Greed → by considering the problems of wealth
iv        bhayaṁ tattvāvamarśanāt Fear → by considering that suffering is due to karma
v         ānvīkṣikyā śoka-mohau Lamentation and illusion → by deliberation on the
knowledge of matter and spirit
vi        dambhaṁ mahad-upāsayā Pride → by serving great devotees
vii        yogāntarāyān maunena Obstacles in yoga → by silence
viii       hiṁsāṁ kāmādy-anīhayā        Envy/ Violence → by giving up sense gratification
ix       kṛpayā bhūtajaṁ duḥkhaṁ       Sufferings from others → by being merciful to them
x       daivaṁ jahyāt samādhinā       Sufferings from providence → meditation in trance
xi          ātmajaṁ yoga-vīryeṇa       Sufferings from body and mind → by haṭha-yoga
xii         nidrāṁ sattva-niṣevayā      Sleep → by developing mode of goodness (in eating)
xiii        rajas tamaś ca sattvena     Passion and ignorance → by increasing goodness
xiv        sattvaṁ copaśamena ca        Goodness → by becoming detached (śuddha-sattva)
25b-26: The Importance of guru
etat sarvaṁ gurau bhaktyā puruṣo hy        One can conquer all of these obstacles quickly and easily
añjasā jayet                   by service of guru with faith and devotion.
yasya sākṣād bhagavati jñāna-dīpa-        The guru is as good as the Supreme Lord, because he
prade gurau                    gives transcendental knowledge for enlightenment.
martyāsad-dhīḥ śrutaṁ tasya sarvaṁ         The knowledge of a person, who thinks that the guru is
kuñjara-śaucavat                 an ordinary mortal, is like elephant bath.
But the guru’s relatives and neighbors consider him an ordinary human being! How can a
disciple consider him as good as God?
27. Misunderstanding is not factual: Lord Kṛṣṇa is the master of all jīvas and material nature
(pradhāna-puruṣeśvaraḥ). His lotus feet are sought and worshiped by great sages like Vyāsa.
Yet, some fools consider Him an ordinary human. (Similarly some think the guru an ordinary
human, but he is not.)
Guru Vs. God: The guru is called sevaka-bhagavān, the servitor Personality of Godhead,
and Kṛṣṇa is called sevya-bhagavān, the Supreme Personality of Godhead who is to be
worshiped. The guru is the worshiper of God, whereas Kṛṣṇa is the worshipable God.
Non-difference: The Supreme Lord gives real knowledge to the entire world, and the
spiritual master, as His representative, carries the message throughout the world. Therefore,
on the absolute platform, there is no difference between them.
28. Useless labor: Rituals, regulations and austerities are all meant to control the senses and
mind, and come to the point of meditation upon the Supreme Lord. If that end is not achieved,
they are simply labor in frustration.
29. Spiritual Vs. material progress: One’s occupation, though produces wealth, cannot make
one spiritually advanced. Similarly, Vedic rituals done by nondevotees do not bring about
attainment of the Lord.
30. To conquer the mind, one must leave the family and live alone independently, by begging
as much as he needs, to maintain himself (sannyāsa).
This is the process of liberation for the householder. If the householder has association
with his family, he cannot conquer lust, though he tries. He should give it up.
31. Āsana: One should do yoga in a sacred place, not too high or low, sit comfortably, steady
and equipoised, keeping body straight, and chant the Vedic praṇava (oṁ).
There is no difference between the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra and oṁkāra because both of
them are sound representations of the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa (praṇavaḥ sarva-vedeṣu). Hare
Kṛṣṇa mantra may be chanted without consideration of the place, time or the sitting
arrangements.
32. Prāṇāyāma: Staring at the tip of the nose, the yogī does pūraka, kumbhaka and recaka
(inhaling, exhaling and holding breath), until the mind gives up all desires.
33. Controlling mind: When the mind drifts towards feelings of sense gratification, he should
immediately bring it back and arrest it within the core of his heart.
34-35. Peaceful mind: With such practice, in a short time his heart attains peace. When one’s
consciousness is free from lusty desires, it becomes calm. Then one does not return to
materialistic acts.
36. Vāntāśī sannyāsī (vomit eater): One who accepts sannyāsa giving up dharma, artha and
kāma, but again returns to such material acts, is called a vāntāśī, or a shameless eater of his own
vomit.
37. Asattama sannyāsī (great sinner): Sannyāsīs who first consider that the perishable body is
not the self, and becomes stool, worms or ashes, but who later think the body is the self, are
considered most sinful (asattamāḥ).
38-39. Abominable actions in different āśramas
i      gṛhasthasya kriyā-tyāgo Gṛhastha → to give up prescribed duties
ii        vrata-tyāgo vaṭorapi    Brahmacārī → to give up vows
iii       tapasvino grāma-sevā     Vānaprastha → to live in village and do social acts
iv        bhikṣor indriya-lolatā   Sannyāsī → to be addicted to sense gratification
Such lowest renegades and pretenders are bewildered by māyā. One should either reject them,
or if possible, compassionately teach them to resume their position.
The next verse criticizes a fallen sannyāsī who is described above.
40. The human form is meant for understanding the self and the Supreme Self. If one
(specifically a sannyāsī) understands them, by being purified by advanced knowledge, why
should he strive to maintain the body for sense gratification?
The material body is the cause of bondage for a person bewildered by māyā. But for an
attentive spiritual seeker, the same body is the cause of liberation. Thus the human body may be
used in two ways – to degrade to hellish conditions or to go back to Godhead. This meaning is
conveyed through the metaphor of body-chariot with the soul as the passenger. If one drives this
chariot well with the directions of a bona fide guru, one can reach the destination, i.e., one goes
back to Godhead. But if one drives it whimsically, one may have an accident, i.e., one returns to
the cycle of birth and death. This is now described in the next six verses.
41   Horses                       Senses
Reins                        Mind (master of senses)
Destinations                 Sense objects
Chariot driver               Intelligence
Seat of the charioteer       Consciousness
42 Spokes of wheels               Ten life airs
Wheels                       Religion and irreligion
Passenger                    Conditioned soul
Bow                          Praṇava oṁkāra (obtained by guru’s mercy)
Arrow                        Pure soul
Target                       Supreme Lord Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa8 (goal of life)
43-44 Enemies (to be conquered to Attachment, greed, lamentation, illusion, fear, madness,
progress towards the target) false prestige, envy, bewilderment etc (influenced by
passion and ignorance and sometimes by goodness also)
45 Sword to destroy the           Knowledge sharpened by service to guru and
enemies                      paramparā, and the Lord’s mercy (acyuta-bala). Thus,
one is attains spiritual bliss and gives up material body
(chariot).
46 Wrong path                     Not taking shelter of Acyuta and Baladeva, the soul
comes to the path of sense enjoyment in this world.
Dark well                    Saṁsāra: Being thrown into material existence.
Plunderers                   Attraction and repulsion to sense objects
If enjoyment in the world is a wrong path that binds one to the material existence, why is it
prescribed in the scriptures? – Different prescriptions are given according to one’s qualification.
By the path of pravṛtti one remains a householder. By the path of nivṛtti one becomes a sannyāsī.
This is explained in the next ten verses.
47-56: THE PATHS OF PRAVṚTTI AND NIVṚTTI
47. Two Vedic paths – Pravṛtti and Nivṛtti
pravṛttaṁ ca nivṛttaṁ ca dvi-vidhaṁ According to the Vedas, there are two kinds of activities
karma vaidikam            —pravṛtti and nivṛtti.
āvartate pravṛttena         Pravṛtti means raising from a lower to a higher status of
material life, by which one is entangled.
nivṛttenāśnute 'mṛtam          Nivṛtti means the cessation of material desire by which
one is purified and becomes fit for eternal, blissful life.
48-51: Pravṛtti mārga – Path of enjoyment
48-49. Pravrtti activities are meant for the fulfillment of one’s material desires. They include
different rituals, animal sacrifices and public welfare activities.
50-51. Pitṛ-yāna: Through the celestial smoke from the sacrifices, the jīva attains the moon
planet. After enjoying, he again descends to earth through rain, to become herbs, which are eaten
by people and will turn into semen. Thus he is reborn.
53-55: Nivṛtti mārga – Path of detachment
52-53. Giving up sacrifices: The brāhmaṇa, purified by saṁskāras (from impregnation to
death), offers his sensual actions into the senses illuminated by the fire of knowledge: Actions →
senses → mind → speech → syllables → oṁ → bindu → nāda (vibration of sound) → prāṇa
(life air) → mahati (the Supreme). [“→” denotes “are offered into”]
If we simply place ourselves at Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet by chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, we
need not take much trouble in arranging to return to the spiritual world. By the mercy of
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, this is very easy.
54-55. Deva-yāna: On his path of ascent, the progressive living entity successively enters the
plantes of the fire, the sun and finally Brahmāloka. He then surpasses his gross, subtle and causal
designations and attains his pure spiritual state as soul and doesn’t return to the material world.
56. Conclusion: One who is fully aware of the paths of pitṛ-yāna and deva-yāna through the
eyes of scriptures, is never bewildered, though situated in a material body.
57-68: SUMMARY OF OCCUPATIONAL DUTIES
57. The all-pervading and ever-existing Supreme Brahman
ādāv ante janānāṁ sad    He always exists in the beginning and in the ending of
everything and all living entities,
bahir antaḥ parāvaram    internally and externally, as superior and inferior objects,
jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ vaco vācyaṁ   as the knowledge (or senses), knowable (or sense
objects), as expression of words, the object of
understanding,
tamo jyotis tv ayaṁ svayam as darkness and light. He is personally everything.
How can the sannyāsī say that everything is the Supreme Lord or Brahman, when everyone
perceives difference between enjoyed objects and enjoyers?
58. The world is real, not false: Although one may consider the sun’s reflection from a mirror
to be false, sunlight has its factual existence (without the sunlight the reflection would be
impossible). Similarly, one cannot prove by speculation that there is no reality.
Reality behind the reflection: The impersonalists try to prove that the varieties we see in
this world are false (vivarta-vāda), just as a rope seen to be a snake is false. But the
Vaiṣṇavas say that although the idea that the rope is a snake is false, the snake exists in
reality. The varieties of this world (although temporary) would be impossible unless there
were a real prototype in the spiritual world.
59. Body is false (temporary): The body is neither a combination nor transformation of the five
material elements. Because the body and its ingredients are neither distinct nor amalgamated, all
such theories are insubstantial.
Lord Kṛṣṇa and His multi-energies exist simultaneously. Everything is an expansion of
Kṛṣṇa’s energy. So, He is simultaneously one with and different from everything. Yet, by
worshiping stone or wood we get no result, but when the stone and wood are represented
in the Lord’s original form as a Deity, by worshiping the Deity we get the desired result.
60. World is false (temporary): Body cannot exist without subtle sense objects. Since the body
is temporary, the sense objects are also naturally false or temporary.
If the body and the world are false, how does the perception that elements are real arise?
61. Dualities are due to illusion: When a substance and its parts are separated, seeing similarity
between them is illusion (bhrama). The prescriptions and prohibitions in scriptures are like
wakeful and sleep states in a dream.
The temporary or unreal material world is a reflection of the eternal real spiritual world.
Material body is false or temporary but the Supreme Lord’s spiritual body is eternal.
Although the water in a mirage is false, but water exists outside the desert. Similarly,
nothing real (permanent) is in this material world, but reality is in the spiritual world. The
Lord’s form and His abode (Goloka and Vaikuṇṭha) are eternal realities.
62-65: Philosophy of Adviata (three types of oneness)
62. One realizes the self and gives up the three states of wakefulness, dreaming and sleep,
contemplating on the following three types of oneness or non-difference (advaita).
63. Bhāvādvaitaṁ (oneness of conceptions) means seeing the effect and the cause as one
(kārya-kāraṇa-vastv-aikya), like threads (cause) being related to a cloth (effect). That duality is
ultimately unreal.
64. Kriyādvaitaṁ (oneness of activities) is attained when one dedicates all activities done with
body, mind and words directly to the service of the Supreme Lord (sarvakarma-samarpaṇam).9
65. Dravyādvaitaṁ (oneness of objects or interest) is attained when the ultimate goal10 (svārtha-
kāmayor) of one’s self, wife, children, relatives and all other embodied living beings is one.
66. Summary of the conduct of āśramas: In the absence of danger, one must perform perform
his prescribed duties according to his status of life, with the things, endeavors, process and place
that are not forbidden for him, and not by any other means.
67. Conclusion: When one does occupational duties according to these instructions, and
worships Kṛṣṇa, one can attain Kṛṣṇa even while remaining at home.
Previously Yudhiṣṭhira had said (in 7.14.1) that he was a householder ignorant of spiritual life.
But one should not think that the Pāṇḍavas are amongst the regular householders. Nārada Muni
encouraged Yudhiṣṭhira by saying, “You are already on the safe side because you, along with
your entire family, have become a pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa.”
68. Kṛṣṇa’s grace on the Pāṇḍavas: O Yudhiṣṭhira, by serving Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, all of you
have excaped great dangers, conquered great enemies and gathered ingriedients for sacrifices. By
His grace, may you be delivered from material involvement.
Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa, the common goal of all āśramas, as explained in the last five chapters, is
the goal of pure devotees, both sādhaka and siddha. However, He throws the siddhas into
the whirlpool of both bliss and danger to make them dance in the waves of His love.
The Pāṇḍavas are a practical example of how to live in security and safety by the grace of
Kṛṣṇa. Everyone should follow the example of the Pāṇḍavas.
69-80: NĀRADA MUNI CONCLUDES
69-74: Nārada Muni describes his previous life as Upabarhaṇa
69. In another Mahā-kalpa, I was a respectable Gandharva known as Upabarhaṇa.
70. Position: I was beautiful, friendly and had a well-built attractive body, pleasing to women.
Thus I was bewildered, always feeling lusty desires.
71. Festival: Once the Gandharvas and Apsarās were invited by the prajāpatis to take part in a
saṅkīrtana festival to glorify the Supreme Lord, in the assembly of devatās.
72. Offense: I, surrounded by women, went there and sang the glories of other devatās in an
intoxicated way. The Prajāpatis cursed me, “Because you transgressed etiquette, become a śūdra,
devoid of beauty.”
73. Reaction: I took birth as a sūdra, son of a maidservant, and engaged in the service of
Vaiṣṇavas. Consequently, in the next life, I took birth as the son of Lord Brahmā.
74. Conclusion: I have thus described to you the dharma of a gṛhastha, which destroys sin. The
process of chanting the Lord’s holy name is so powerful that it enables even gṛhasthas to easily
gain the ultimate result achieved by sannyāsīs.
75-77: Nārada Muni glorifies the Pāṇḍavas
75. You Pāṇḍavas are most fortunate, for Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Brahman, personally lives in
your palace, because He is attracted to you. Knowing this great saints visit your house. (This
verse is same as 7.10.48)
76. Kṛṣṇa acts as your well-wisher, friend, cousin, heart and soul, worshipable director and
guru, although He is sought by great sages, who seek liberation and bliss.
After instructing Yudhiṣṭhira, Nārada Muni prays for Lord Kṛṣṇa’s blessings so that He will
be pleased and that everyone becomes perfect in God consciousness and go back to Him.
77. Nārada Muni’s final prayer
na yasya sākṣād bhava-padmajādibhī Even Śiva and Brahmā cannot understand Him
rūpaṁ dhiyā vastutayopavarṇitam or describe His true form by their intelligence.
maunena bhaktyopaśamena pūjitaḥ He is worshiped by silence, by cessation of material
activities and by devotional service.
prasīdatām eṣa sa sātvatāṁ patiḥ May that master of devotees be pleased with us.
78-80: Śukadeva Gosvāmī describes Yudhiṣṭhira’s response and concludes
78. Hearing Nārada Muni’s instructions, Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja felt great pleasure, and in great
ecstasy, love and affection, he worshiped Lord Kṛṣṇa (and Nārada Muni).
79. Nārada Muni bade them farewell and departed. Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja was struck with
wonder having heard that Kṛṣṇa, his cousin was the Supreme Lord.
80. All the living entities were generated from the daughters of Dakṣa. I have now described
them and their different dynasties.
8 Viṣṇu is the goal: As an arrow is aimed with a bow and shot at a target/ enemy, the jīva is shot at the Lord by uttering oṁ. But
that does it mean that the Lord is the enemy? No! It means that Lord Viṣṇu is the goal of one’s life, and a devotee takes the arrow
of his purified life, and with the bow—the transcendental chanting of praṇava, or the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra—he throws himself
toward the Supreme Lord Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa. It is like Arjuna’s aiming the fish in the wheel at Draupadī’s svayamvara. Just as
Arjuna pierced the target with an arrow by the strength of his arms and attained Draupadī, the devotees attain the Lord by the
strength of their bhakti.
Even if one considers the Lord as enemy, and thus constantly thinks of him, one is purified and attains liberation (as described
in Chapter One).
Some devotees are in vīra-rasa (chivalrous mood) with the Lord, who becomes their so-called enemy. For example, Bhīṣma
pierced Kṛṣṇa’s body in Kurukṣetra with arrows. Similarly, if with the arrow of chanting Lord’s holy name, one pierces His lotus
feet, one goes back to Godhead.
9 One must be guided by the guru on this oneness; one should not manufacture one’s own oneness.
10 The actual interest of all living entities is to go back to Godhead.
1. VAIṢṆAVA COMPASSION
naivodvije para duratyaya-vaitaraṇyās
tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ
śoce tato vimukha-cetasa indriyārtha-
māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān
“O best of the great personalities, I am not at all afraid of material existence, for wherever I stay I am fully absorbed
in thoughts of Your glories and activities. My concern is only for the fools and rascals who are making elaborate plans
for material happiness and maintaining their families, societies and countries. I am simply concerned with love for
them.” (7.9.43: Prayer by Prahlāda Mahārāja)
Place of misery: The material world is duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam [BG 8.15]— temporary and
miserable—cannot be turn into into sukhālayam, a place of happiness, as material nature works
in her own way. Everyone struggles very hard to fight through the modes of passion and
ignorance and conquer material nature, but at the end everyone is vanquished by nature's laws.
(7.9.43 P)
Lord’s mercy is the only hope: To cross Vaitaraṇī between the material and spiritual worlds, is
an extremely difficult task. BG 7.14: daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī mama māyā duratyayā. Therefore
one cannot surpass the stringent laws of material nature except by the mercy of the Supreme
Lord. (7.9.43 P)
Prakṛti fools the materialist: The materialists make elaborate political, social and cultural plans
to adjust the material miseries, but their attempts to become happy are repeatedly baffled. They
try to create a comfortable situation, but only succeed in creating another uncomfortable
situation. This situation is called māyāsukhāya or temporary materialistic happiness. (7.9.43 P)
Who is happy?: Those who are trying to serve the Lord are happy, whereas those who have no
assets in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and are struggling for existence are not only foolish but extremely
unhappy also. (7.9.43 P)
Vaiṣṇava compassion: A devotee laments to see others bereft of love of God, rotting in material
activities for transient material pleasure and spoiling their lives toiling all day and night simply
for sense gratification. So a devotee devises various plans to deliver them from the clutches of
māyā. A devotee may even go to hell to deliver the conditioned souls.
Goṣṭhy-ānandī wants to see everyone taking advantage of the holy name of the Lord and
advance in spiritual life. Prahlāda Mahārāja is an outstanding example of the same. (CC Adi 7.92
P)
Māyā-sukha Vs. real sukha: Goddess Durgā provides temporary benefits to her worshipers,
which result only in māyā-sukha (illusory happiness); such happiness does not endure. On the
other hand, the extraordinary material opulences received by devotees like Prahlāda and Dhruva
were not māyā-sukha, but were direct gifts of the goddess of fortune, who resides in the heart of
Nārāyaṇa. (5.18.22 P)
Who is assured of protection?: A devotee engaged in the Lord’s service, may not be expert in
self-defense, but because of being fully dependent on the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, he is
always sure of protection by Him. (9.4.28 P)
Art of Kṛṣṇa consciousness: Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, Dhruva Mahārāja and Prahlāda Mahārāja
were gṛhasthas, householders, but they trained themselves and learned the art of always
remaining in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, with no interruption in their service. “What is that art?” –
tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ: simply glorifying the victorious activities and
pastimes of the Lord. (Science of Self Realization book)
Healthy fear: Prahlāda Mahārāja did not fear the material existence because of his full
absorption in the Lord. But he was afraid of the bad association in saṁsāra which was filled with
hatred and criticism towards the Lord.
2. THE BASIS OF CASTE
yasya yal lakṣaṇaṁ proktaṁ
puṁso varṇābhivyañjakam
yad anyatrāpi dṛśyeta
tat tenaiva vinirdiśet
“If one shows the symptoms (yasya
yal lakṣaṇaṁ) of being a brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya or śūdra
(varṇābhivyañjakam), as described (proktaṁ), even if he has appeared in a different class (yad
anyatrāpi dṛśyeta), he should be accepted according to those symptoms of classification (tat tenaiva
vinirdiśet).” (7.11.35)
Context: Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira inquires from Nārada Muni about the actual religion of a human
being and about the special characteristics of varṇāśramadharma, which marks the highest status
of human civilization. Nārada Muni speaks this verse in relation to the identification of the four
social orders.
The tendency of a particular man towards work is determined by the modes of material nature
which he has acquired (BG 4.13 P).
Prescribed duties are duties enjoined according to one’s psychophysical condition, under the
spell of the modes of material nature. (BG 3.35 P)
One cannot suddenly give up a profession to which he is accustomed (conditioned). So, it is
recommended that one should not give it up haphazardly, but try to be gradually awakened. (7.11
Summary)
Lord Kṛṣṇa has created the four varṇas for the systematic development of Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. (BG 4.13)
Perfect education: The spiritual master should be expert enough to recognize the tendencies of
the student and immediately train him in that line. This is perfect education. One should be
selected for training according to his qualifications.
Saves time: Training everyone in everything is waste of time. If one is inclined toward
production, business or agriculture, he should be trained in those fields. If one is philosophical,
he should be trained as a philosopher. If one is militaristic, he should be trained as a warrior. And
if one has ordinary ability, he should remain a laborer.
o Example: Arjuna belonged to a kṣatriya family. He and his brothers were never trained as
philosophers. Droṇācārya was their master and teacher, and although he was a brāhmaṇa
taught them Dhanur Veda [military science], not brahma-vidyā (theistic philosophy).
Following another’s path
o Lord Kṛṣṇa says, “It is far better to discharge one's prescribed duties, even though faultily,
than another's duties perfectly.” (BG 3.35)
o Social order will be disrupted if the unqualified śūdras become so-called brāhmaṇas and
kṣatriyas. (9.16.28 P)
Exceptions
o As Kṛṣṇa is transcendental to this system of four castes, a person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is
also transcendental to all divisions of human society. (BG 4.13 P)
o Although Paraśurāma belonged to the brahminical group, he circumstantially had to work as a
kṣatriya.
o Viśvāmitra was born in a kṣatriya family, by austerities and penances he achieved the position
of a brāhmaṇa.
o These histories confirm the statements in śāstra that a brāhmaṇa may become a kṣatriya
kṣatriya may become a brāhmaṇa or vaiśya, and a vaiśya may become a brāhmaṇa, by
achieving the required qualities. (9.16.28 P)
Other sources with similar verse
o cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ (BG 4.13).
o sthito brāhmaṇa-dharmeṇa brāhmaṇyam…. (Mahābhārata Anuśāsana-parva, Chapter 163)
o Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī comments: śamādibhir eva brāhmaṇādi-vyavahāro mukhyaḥ… (CC
Madhya 24.330)
o śūdre tu yad bhavel lakṣma dvije tac ca na vidyate… (Mahābhārata Vanaparva, 177.20)
o śūdra-yonau hi jātasya sad-guṇānupatiṣṭhataḥ… (Mahābhārata Vana-parva, Chapter 203.11-
12)
3. NINE PROCESSES OF BHAKTI
śrī-prahrāda uvāca
śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam
arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ sakhyam ātma-nivedanam
iti puṁsārpitā viṣṇau bhaktiś cen nava-lakṣaṇā
kriyeta bhagavaty addhā tan manye 'dhītam uttamam
Prahlāda Mahārāja said: Hearing and chanting about the transcendental holy name, form,
qualities, paraphernalia and pastimes of Lord Viṣṇu, remembering them, serving the lotus
feet of the Lord, offering the Lord respectful worship with sixteen types of paraphernalia,
offering prayers to the Lord, becoming His servant, considering the Lord one's best friend,
and surrendering everything unto Him (in other words, serving Him with the body, mind and
words)—these nine processes are accepted as pure devotional service. One who has
dedicated his life to the service of Kṛṣṇa through these nine methods should be understood
to be the most learned person, for he has acquired complete knowledge. (7.5.23-24)
The following verse by Śrīla Rupa Gosvāmī presents the names of great devotees who
exemplified the nine processes of bhakti described by Prahlāda in the above verse.
śrī-viṣṇoḥ śravaṇe parīkṣid abhavad vaiyāsakiḥ kīrtane
prahlādaḥ smaraṇe tad-aṅghri-bhajane lakṣmīḥ pṛthuḥ pūjane
akrūras tv abhivandane kapi-patir dāsye 'tha sakhye 'rjunaḥ
sarvasvātma-nivedane balir abhūt kṛṣṇāptir eṣāṁ param
"Parīkṣit Mahārāja attained salvation simply by hearing, and Śukadeva Gosvāmī attained
salvation simply by chanting. Prahlāda Mahārāja attained salvation by remembering the Lord.
The goddess of fortune, Lakṣmīdevī, attained perfection by worshiping the Lord's lotus feet.
Pṛthu Mahārāja attained salvation by worshiping the Deity of the Lord. Akrūra attained salvation
by offering prayers, Hanumān by rendering service, Arjuna by establishing friendship with the
Lord, and Bali Mahārāja by offering everything to the service of the Lord."
1. GLORIES OF BHAKTI-YOGA
Bhakti or devotional service unto Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the eternal constitutional position of every
living entity. However, one who conditioned in this world is forgetful of his original position and
is swayed away by the waves of material nature. Guru, sādhu and śāstra together make an
unpretentious attempt to remind the conditioned soul of his eternal relationship with Kṛṣṇa and
delineate the process of reviving it to attain the ultimate goal of life, kṛṣṇa-prema or love of
Godhead. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam repeatedly recommends and glorifies the process of bhakti-yoga
as the topmost means for the spiritual upliftment of the humanity. The following are the various
glories of bhakti-yoga mentioned in Canto Seven, categorized in relevant sections.
Bhakti manifests all good qualities in a person
1. A Vaiṣṇava is automatically a brāhmaṇa. One may be a demon by birth, yet by practicing
bhakti, he can possess all the qualities of a perfect brāhmaṇa. (7.4.31-33 brahmaṇyaḥ śīla-
sampannaḥ…)
2. All good qualities which exist in the Lord, also exist forever in His devotees. And such
devotees are glorified even in demoniac assemblies. (7.4.34-35)
3. A devotee is so humble that even if he is fully qualified, he feels himself disqualified even to
offer prayers to Lord. (7.9.8 brahmādayaḥ sura-gaṇā…)
4. Bhakti or Kṛṣṇa consciousness is the only means to make everyone fearless. (7.9.5)
Bhakti awards liberation
5. Bhakti is the only way to be freed from all material contamination. (7.5.32 naiṣāṁ matis
tāvad urukramāṅghriṁ…)
6. By performing various activities of bhakti one becomes free from all material contamination
and attains the platform of loving service to the Lord. (7.7.30-33 guru-śuśrūṣayā bhaktyā…,
7.7.37)
7. Anyone can be purified of material life if he offers prayers to the Lord and hears the Lord's
glories. (7.9.12 pūyeta yena hi pumān anuvarṇitena)
8. Shelter of the Lord’s lotus feet is the ultimate goal for liberation from conditional life. (7.9.16
trasto 'smy ahaṁ kṛpaṇa-vatsala…)
Bhakti is our natural function
9. Attraction towards Kṛṣṇa is natural for all living entities. (7.5.14)
10. Viṣṇu is the center of love for everyone, and therefore to engage in the loving service of the
Lord is natural. (7.6.2)
11. The Lord is naturally the master of all, and we are naturally His servants. (7.10.6)
12. Since the Lord is intimately related to us, there are no impediments in pleasing Him.
(7.6.19)
Bhakti is the most recommended path
13. To give up embarrassment by material sufferings, one must take full shelter of Lord Kṛṣṇa.
(7.5.5 tat sādhu manye…)
14. Bhakti should be practiced from childhood. (7.6.1 kaumāra ācaret prājño…)
15. Perfection of human form is attained by engaging in bhakti. (7.6.1)
16. One can show mercy to all living entities by enlightening them in bhakti. (7.6.24)
17. The best of all activities is that which develops one’s love for God. (7.7.29)
18. Bhakti is the ultimate goal of human life. (7.7.55 etāvān eva loke 'smin…)
19. The only remedy to get out of miserable life is to engage in the Lord’s service. (7.9.17
yasmāt priyāpriya-viyoga…). No remedy is successful without the Lord’s shelter. (7.9.19
bālasya neha śaraṇaṁ pitarau nṛsiṁha…)
20. One can cross the ocean of nescience by glorifying the Lord. (7.9.18 so 'haṁ priyasya
suhṛdaḥ paradevatāyā…)
21. Vedas, scriptures, religion or everyone's occupational duty, all of them must aim at
understanding Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Lord. (7.11.7 dharma-mūlaṁ hi bhagavān…)
No barriers in transmitting bhakti
22. Bhakti is uninterrupted and can be transmitted in any circumstances. Prahlāda Mahārāja
received it in womb of his mother. (7.7.16-17)
23. A pure devotee brings transformation even in demons. Prahlāda Mahārāja preached Kṛṣṇa
consciousness to his schoolmates. (7.8.1-2)
Kṛṣṇa is pleased by bhakti alone
24. Qualities that can satisfy the Supreme Lord. (7.11.8-12)
25. Only bhakti can satisfy Lord, e.g. Gajendra (7.9.9 manye dhanābhijana…)
Bhakti bestows all benedictions
26. Nothing is unobtainable for devotees who satisfy the Supreme Lord. (7.6.25)
27. By devotional service one achieves what is obtainable by the paramahaṁsa. (7.9.50)
Result of absorption in Kṛṣṇa
28. Somehow or the other, if one is absorbed in Kṛṣṇa (even with a negative emotion), one gets
liberated. (SB 7.1.26, 30-32, 47 tasmād vairānubandhena…)
Attitude and vision of great bhaktas
29. One who follows nine processes of bhakti should be understood to be the most learned
person. (7.5.23-24 śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ…)
30. Devotees do not see any living entity as an enemy or friend but think everyone as an eternal
servant of God. (7.5.11-12)
31. Unlike the pseudo spiritualists who are interested in their own deliverance, the devotees are
concerned to bring people to shelter of the Supreme Lord. (7.9.43-46)
32. A devotee doesn’t want any material possession but only service to a devotee. (7.9.24
tasmād amūs tanu-bhṛtām aham āśiṣo 'jña…)
33. A pure devotee is always grateful and aspires to serve one’s spiritual master. (7.9.28)
34. A pure devotee doenst desire any material benefit from the Lord and rejects whatever
hampers their devotional service. (7.9.55, 7.10.1-2)
35. Wherever exalted devotees stay, that place and the dynasties there, even if condemned, are
purified. (7.10.19 yatra yatra ca mad-bhaktāḥ…)
The Lord’s reciprocation with the devotees
36. The Supreme Lord protects a devotee in all conditions. (7.5.41)
37. Bodily needs are automatically fulfilled for a person absorbed in bhakti, like a small child
cared by his mother doesn’t know how his bodily needs are fulfilled. (7.4.38)
38. The Lord proves His devotee’s words true. (7.8.17 satyaṁ vidhātuṁ nija-bhṛtya…)
39. Pure devotees of the Lord are sent by Him to teach the mankind. (7.10.3)
40. The Lord never induces His devotees to do something unbeneficial. (7.10.4)
41. As one surrenders to the Lord, He rewards him accordingly. (7.9.27)
42. When the Lord is pleased with the living entity because of his devotional service, one
develops an equal vision towards all. (7.5.12)
43. The Lord’s chastising a demon and accepting a devotee’s prayers - are equally glorious, as
both are for their own good. (7.1.25)
Material life is called ‘pavarga’ because here we are subject to five different states of suffering,
represented by the letters pa, pha, ba, bha and ma. Pa means pariśrama or hard labor. Pha
means phena or foam from mouth due to labor. Ba means byarthatā, disappointment despite hard
labor. Bha means bhaya or fear due to not knowing what will happen next. Ma means mṛtyu or
death. By practicing kṛṣṇa-bhakti, one can give up this ‘pvarga’ and attain ‘apavarga’ or
liberation.
The following compilation lists various verses on the fallacy of materialistic life as described in
the chapters of Canto Seven. For more details the readers may refer to the respective verses and
chapters.
Root of materalism
Forgetfulness leads to misery: The conditioned soul forgets his self-interest (his eternal
relationship with Kṛṣṇa) due to bodily identification. Attracted by the varieties of the material
world, he suffers. (7.13.28)
The Lord’s māyā has created the material conception of life that distinguishes people as
‘friends’ and ‘enemies.’ (7.5.11)
Not a good option
Blind well: The soul-degrading materialistic household life is like a blind well, full of anxieties,
with minds absorbed in “I and mine” conception. One should come out of it by taking shelter of
Lord Hari. (7.5.5 tat sādhu manye 'sura-varya…)
Calculated analysis: The 100 years of human life are wasted by 50 years in sleep, 20 years in
childhood, 20 years in oldage and the remaining years in family attachments. (7.6.6-8)
Strength of material attachment: Who can give up desire for money (arthatṛṣṇāṁ), which is
dearer than one’s life? Thieves, servants and merchants try to get money even by risking their
lives. (7.6.10)
Insubstantial: The happiness and blessings in this world are as insubstantial as a mirage in a
desert. (7.9.25 kutrāśiṣaḥ śruti-sukhā mṛgatṛṣṇi-rūpāḥ…)
Ignorance: Even the learned are overcome by ignorance absorbed in family affairs, incapable of
understanding oneself. (7.6.16)
Insignificant: The material happiness of household life and sex life is insignificant. (7.9.45
maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tucchaṁ…)
Cause of concern: Great devotees like Prahlāda are very much concerned about the suffering
conditioned souls. (7.9.43-44 naivodvije para duratyaya…)
Materialists are ignorant, ambitious, misled and entangled (7.5.31 na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi
viṣṇuṁ…)
Based on a faulty assumption
Troublesome remedies: The remedies to material dualities and more miserable than the
miseries themselves. (7.9.17 yasmāt priyāpriya-viyoga-saṁyoga-janma…)
Illusory happiness: A man and a woman unite for sex pleasure, but they actually do not become
happy. Material sense enjoyment is simply an imagination. Spiritual happiness is real happiness,
and it can be achieved only when one stops all materialistic activities. (7.13.26-27)
Insatiable: Family attachments – with wife, children, parents, daughter, furniture and so on – are
insatiable (7.6.11-13)
Analogy: Just as a deer cannot see the water within a covered well, but runs after a mirage, the
conditioned soul does not see happiness within oneself, but runs for it elsewhere. But all of one’s
plans are ultimately baffled. (7.13.29-31)
Example: In spite of controlling all directions and enjoying all kinds of sense gratification,
Hiraṇyakaśipu was dissatisfied due to uncontrolled senses. (7.4.19)
Consequences
The attached householders’ inclination towards Kṛṣṇa is never aroused by (i) others’ instructions
(ii) own efforts or (iii) a combination of both. Due to uncontrolled senses, they enter hellish life
and repeatedly chew the chewed. (7.5.30 matir na kṛṣṇe parataḥ svato vā…)
Frustration: A materialist (karmī) is frustrated in his attempts to attain better enjoyment.
(7.7.41-42)
No space for the Lord: The sinful material mind absorbed in lusty desires cannot think of the
Supreme Lord’s activities (7.9.39 naitan manas tava kathāsu…)
Transmigration caused due to insatiable material desires. (7.13.24)
Binding: An attached householder with uncontrolled senses, is bound strongly by ropes of
affection for his family and cannot be liberated. (7.6.9)
Embarrassment: The ever-distracted senses constantly embarrass the conditioned soul who is
like a person with many wives. (7.9.40 jihvaikato 'cyuta vikarṣati…)
Ultimately ends in failure
Temporary: The happiness offered by ephemeral riches, wife, animals, children, residence and
other luxuries is perishable in a moment. (7.7.39 rāyaḥ kalatraṁ paśavaḥ sutādayo…)
heavenly happiness is temporary. (7.7.40)
Perishable: The material body, its possessions and relations are all perishable and sources of
misery (7.7.43-47)
Constant fear: Even a wealthy man is insecure due to being a victim of senses, and out of fear
of government laws, thieves, enemies, family members, animals, beggars and so on. (7.13.32-33
Defeat: Absorption in family maintenance (kuṭumba-poṣa) leads to exhaustion of lifespan and
defeat of the real purpose of human life. (7.6.14-15)
One’s long life, opulence and power will be vanquished within a moment. (7.9.23)
Solution: How to let go of materialism
When Lord is pleased – (i) one’s animal intelligence (paśu-buddhi) is destroyed and (ii
doesn’t make distinctions of friends and enemies. (7.5.12)
By Serving Lotus Feet of Devotees: one can come out of materialistic life (7.5.32 naiṣāṁ matis
tāvad urukramāṅghriṁ…)
Performing bhakti: Material happiness of the senses can be obtained automatically. One need
not endeavour for it separately. It is better to utilize one’s human life to perform bhakti. (7.6.3-5)
Solution: By keeping aloof from the association of demons and taking shelter of Lord Nārāyaṇa,
one can be liberated from material bondage. (7.6.18)
Destroying the material intelligence by Kṛṣṇa consciousness: Polluted intelligence entangles
the jīva in material life and three modes. (7.7.27-28)
By knowing the negative effects of material desires, a devotee desires not to have any material
desires. (7.10.7-9)
An intelligent person should give up desire for prestige and money, which is the cause of
lamentation, illusion, fear, anger, attachment, poverty, unnecessary labor etc. (7.13.34
moha-bhaya-krodha…)
By hearing about Kṛṣṇa in good Association, one gradually becomes detached from family
affection, exactly like a man awakening from a dream. (7.14.4)
Cultivating satisfaction by giving up greed for material things. (7.15.15-21)
3. THE GLORIES OF A GURU
A bona fide guru is one who guides us towards the shelter of God. Seeking the guidance of a
guru constitutes the most vital aspect of one’s spiritual life. Prahlāda Mahārāja had two kinds of
gurus—Śaṇḍa and Amarka who taught him materialistic subjects, and Nārada Muni who who
instructed him in transcendental science. Thus Nārada Muni is Prahlāda’s real guru. The
following compilation presents the importance of a guru as described in various chapters of the
Seventh Canto.
Qualification of a Guru
Definition: The word guru refers to the spiritual master who initiates his disciple into
advancement in the science of Kṛṣṇa, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness. (7.4.31-32)
Paramparā: An actual guru is śrotriya, one who has heard or received perfect knowledge
through paramparā, the disciplic succession. (7.5.31)
Order of Lord Śrī Caitanya: One must become a sincere servant of Kṛṣṇa. One should become
a guru and spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness all over the world. (CC Madhya 7.128 yāre dekha, tāre
kaha 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa…) (7.9.41)
Guru is as good as God, but not God
In all the scriptures, spiritual master is considered to be as good as Lord. This does not mean,
however, that Vaiṣṇava thinks himself God, but remains a faithful servant of the Lord and never
tries to enjoy the prestige that might accrue to him from being the Supreme Lord's representative.
(7.14.40-42 P)
Purpose of a Guru
Gives Shelter: When one is perplexed by the problems of life, one must approach a guru
Nārada or his representative in the disciplic succession. [MU 1.2.12 tadvijñānārthaṁ sa gurum
evābhigacchet…] (7.1.21)
Guide: Human form is a most valuable boat, the spiritual master is the captain,
karṇadhāram, to guide the boat, and the instructions of Kṛṣṇa are favorable breeze. One must use
all these facilities to cross the ocean of nescience. (7.15.45)
A representative of Kṛṣṇa only gives perfect knowledge to his disciple. (7.15.76)
Kṛṣṇa as guru: Kṛṣṇa helps as the guru, from within and from without. From without He helps
the devotee as His representative, and from within He talks personally with the pure devotee and
gives him instructions. (7.15.76)
First guru-seva, then Kṛṣṇa-seva
Guru before Kṛṣṇa: Kṛṣṇa does not become the direct spiritual master unless one is fully
trained by His representative spiritual master. (7.15.76)
Vaiṣṇava Principle: One should not bypass the spiritual master and desire to serve the Supreme
Lord. One should serve the spiritual master first. (7.9.28)
Service to Guru
Cross ocean of nescience: By satisfying Guru, one automatically pleases Kṛṣṇa and gets the
strength to cross the ocean of nescience. (7.15.28, 45)
God realization: By staunch faith in the spiritual master and the Supreme Lord, one not only
controls the senses but also realizes the Supreme Lord. (7.15.28)
Imports of Vedic knowledge are revealed to those who have implicit faith in both the Lord and
the spiritual master (ŚU 6.23 yasya deve parā bhaktir…)
Aspiration of devotees: To be in touch with pure devotee and serve him as a sincere servant.
(7.9.24 kālātmanopanaya māṁ nija-bhṛtya-pārśvam…)
First priority: Devotees feel their first duty is to serve guru, for he instructs to one achieve
transcendental position. (7.9.28 so 'haṁ kathaṁ nu visṛje…)
Beginning of spiritual life: Guru-pādāśrayaḥ. By following the instructions of the guru and the
śāstras, a disciple attains the stage of devotional service and becomes unattached to material
possessions. (7.7.33)
Brahmacārī: With a great vow, a brahmacārī lives at the guru-kula, only for the benefit of the
guru. He should be submissive and friendly to the guru. (7.12.1)
Perfection: Only one who executes spiritual life under the direction of spiritual master can
achieve mercy of Kṛṣṇa. yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ. (7.12.11)
Material Guru
Other Interests: Prahlāda Mahārāja did not recognize seminal spiritual master, who are not at
all interested in Viṣṇu. Indeed, they are hopeful of material success (bahirartha-māninaḥ
(7.5.31)
Blind: Gurus, teachers, who are simply interested in this material world are described as andha
blind. (7.5.31)
4. PRAYERS: A SUPPLICATION FOR GRACE
In difficulty, doubt or overwhelming love, faithful devotees express themselves to the Supreme
Lord in prayer and glorification. They don’t seek any material remuneration, nor benefits from
the Lord – but simply seek His shelter, remembrance and love. The following table gives a bird’s
eyeview of the prayers offered by various devotees in Canto Seven.
5. THE DYNAMICS OF LUST
For a spiritual seeker, lust or desire for material enjoyment, specifically sex pleasure, is a great
enemy. Several sections of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam describe the dangers of lust along with fitting
examples of personalities who became victims of lust. The following are some references from
the Seventh Canto on this topic.
Degrees of Lust
Seed of material existence: Prahlāda states that the root cause of material exsisence is the seed
of lusty desires in the core of everyone’s heart (7.10.3)
Spiritual lust: Six anarthas kāma, krodha, lobha, moha, mada and mātsarya all have their
proper use for the Supreme Lord and His devotee. (7.9.1 P)
Even great devotees think that they are under the influence of lust: Prahlāda says “My dear Lord
my mind is extremely sinful and lusty” (7.9.39)
Regulation of Lust
Concession: Among four ashrams, only gṛhastha is given permission by the guru to indulge in
sex during the period favourable for procreation. (7.12.12 P)
Determination: By making plans with determination, one should give up lusty desires for sense
gratification. (7.15.22)
Liberation from lust
Absorption: This great attention towards the Lord even may be due to lusty desires (parakiya
and svakīya). The gopīs by their lusty desires obtained the mercy of Kṛṣṇa. (7.1.30-31)
Servitude: By service to guru, hearing, glorification and remembrance of the Lord, deity
worship, saintly association, offering due respect to all living entities, one can cut down the
influence lust and attain loving service to the Lord. (7.7.32-33)
Yoga: Prahlāda always controlled his senses and life air, and being of steady intelligence and
determination, he subdued all lusty desires. (7.4.33)
Effect of Lust
Unhappiness: One who is content and satisfied serving the Supreme Lord, enjoys happiness
without endeavouring for his livelihood. Where is such happiness for a materialistic man who
being impelled by lust and greed, wanders in all directions with a desire to accumulate wealth?
(7.15.16)
Anger: Lust, anger and greed are the causes of the conditioned soul's bondage in this material
world. (Bg. 3.37 kāma eṣa krodha eṣa…) And when strong lusty desires are unfulfilled, one
becomes angry. (7.15.20)
Contrary Results: In this human life, men and women unite for the sensual pleasure of sex, but
it is observed that none of them are happy. Therefore, seeing the contrary results, I have stopped
taking part in materialistic activities. (7.13.26)
Disturbed: When one's consciousness is uncontaminated by material lusty desires, it becomes
calm and peaceful in all activities, for one is situated in eternal blissful life. (7.15.35)
Losses from Lust: Because of lusty desires from the very beginning of one's birth, the functions
of one's senses, mind, life, body, religion, patience, intelligence, shyness, opulence, strength,
memory and truthfulness are vanquished. (7.10.8)
Lust leads to ignorance: When one is too attached to material enjoyment, he is bereft of all
knowledge. (BG 7.20 kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānāḥ…) (7.10.2 P)
Analogies of Lust
Lusty absorption: Just as absorption of lusty man in women is deep one should be fully
absorbed in thoughts of Kṛṣṇa (7.1.27)
Overindulgence: Just as drops of ghee on a fire never extinguish the fire but a flood of ghee
will, overindulgence in lusty desires mitigates such desires entirely. Low born and sinful people
are allowed to enjoy sinful acts fully, for thus there is a chance that these activities will become
detestful to them, and they will get the opportunity to be purified. (7.11.33-34)
Itching: Sex life is compared to the rubbing of two hands to relieve an itch. Gṛhamedhis, who
have no spiritual knowledge, think that this itching is the greatest platform of happiness,
although actually it is a source of distress. The kṛpaṇas, the fools are not satisfied by repeated
sensuous enjoyment. Those who are dhīra, the sober tolerate this itching, are not subjected to the
sufferings of fools and rascals. (7.9.45)
1. CHARACTER PORTRAYALS
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is a string of episodes describing the qualities and activities of the Supreme
Lord, His various incarnations and His devotees. Just as hearing about the Lord is repeatedly
emphasized in the Bhāgavatam, hearing about the devotees is also given similar importance.
Pure devotees give us inspiration through their example, enlightenment through their teachings
and direction through their instructions.
The qualities of great devotees like Prahlāda Mahārāja are very enlivening to meditating upon.
Similarly, negative charatcers of demons like Hiraṇyakaśipu give is a caution note on the
unfavourable attitudes. The following is a short compilation on the characters of Prahlāda and
Hiraṇyakaśipu to help us understand what is favourable and unfavourable for our spiritual
practice.
PRAHLĀDA MAHĀRĀJA
Life
Lineage: Son of asura king Hiraṇyakaśipu and his mother was Kayādhu. He had three well-
qualified brothers. (7.4.30)
Education: He got spiritual education in the womb of his mother from Nārada Muni, but he was
taught material topics in the school of Śaṇḍa and Amarka. (7.5.2)
Prolong rule: He ruled asuras until the end of the duration of time occupied by Manu. (7.10.11)
Divine Qualities
Mahājana: Prahlāda Mahārāja was one of the twelve Mahājanas.
Mahā-bhāgavata: Just as everything appears yellow to the jaundiced eye, similarly, to Prahlāda,
a mahā-bhāgavata, everyone but himself appeared to be engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service. (7.4.37P)
No enemies: He was nirvairāya (7.4.28). He did not like political philosophy involves
considering someone a friend and someone else an enemy. (7.5.3).
Brāhmaṇa: Prahlāda was an asura by birth, yet he possessed all the qualities of a perfect
brāhmaṇa (brahmaṇyaḥ śīla-sampannaḥ), having very good character and determinination to
understand the Absolute Truth. (7.4.32-33 P)
Delivered clan: Prahlāda asked the Lord to deliver his father and the Lord delivered twenty one
generations of forefathers. (7.10.18)
Best friend: Like the Supersoul, he was kind to every living entity and was the best friend of
everyone. (7.4.31)
Fitting dealings: To respectable persons he acted exactly like a menial servant, to the poor he
was like a father, to his equals he was attached like a sympathetic brother. (7.4.32)
Respectful: He considered his teachers, spiritual masters and older Godbrothers to be as good as
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. (7.4.32)
Faith in guru: He simply followed the instructions of Nārada Muni, his guru, and thus he
always remained a stalwart devotee. (7.13.45 P)
Obedient: He accepted words of Brahmā to pacify lord. (7.9.4)
Modest: He was completely free from unnatural pride that might have arisen from his good
education, riches, beauty, aristocracy and so on. (7.4.32)
Detached: Even as a small boy, he had no interest in playing or other material activities. (7.4.37)
Materially callous: Prahlāda didn’t give any importance to anything in this world, knowing that
even the powerful, opulent or influential, can not endure. (7.9.23 P)
Realized soul: He had no interests in his father’s property. He thought whether one is in the
heaven or hell or is a rich or a poor man’s son, material conditions are everywhere. Therefore no
condition of life is at all pleasing. (7.9.17 P)
Grateful: As a Vaiṣṇava, despite all the inconveniences imposed upon him by his father, he
could not forget his father's affection. (7.10.15-17 P)
Felt unqualified: He said to the Lord that he was low class yet the Lord had placed His lotus
hands upon his head. (7.9.26 )
Sense controlled: He always controlled his senses and life air, and being of steady intelligence
and determination, he subdued all lusty desires. (7.4.33)
Undisturbed: He was not agitated when put into danger, and he was neither directly nor
indirectly interested in the Vedic fruitive activities and was completely devoid of material
desires. (7.4.33)
pacify the fearsome Lord Nṛsiṁha-deva whom even goddess Lakṣmī could not approach. (7.9.4)
Confident: He was confident that Kṛṣṇa would give him full protection under all circumstances.
(7.8.7 P)
Humble: Although Prahlāda Mahārāja was a pure, exalted Vaiṣṇava, he thought himself most
unqualified to offer prayers to the Supreme Lord. (7.9.8 P)
Doesn’t waste time: At the opportune moment when it was possible to preach about Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, he taught his classmates. He wanted to utilize every moment for advancing in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness. (7.5.54 P)
Cognizant: Prahlāda knew the best of knowledge, and when his father inquired from him, he
gave him that knowledge. Prahlāda was able to solve the most difficult parts of problems because
of his advanced Kṛṣṇa consciousness (7.5.4 P)
Kṛṣṇa conscious vision: Just as those who are greedy see everything as a source of money-
making and those who are lusty see everything as being conducive to sex, Prahlāda saw
Nārāyaṇa even within a stone column (sthāvara-jaṅgama dekhe...). (7.4.37 P)
Eager to attain Lord: Prahlāda Mahārāja expected that the Lord, by His kindness, would call
him again to the shelter of His lotus feet. (7.9.16 P)
Special quality: Prahlāda still lives in Vaikuṇṭhaloka as well as within this material world on the
planet Sutala, just like the Supreme Lord. (7.4.34 P)
Compassionate: He does not want be benefited alone, rather, he prays to the Lord that all of us
fallen souls in this material world may be delivered. (7.9.42 P)
Devine aspiration: Did not want to enjoy the estate left by his father; rather, he wanted to
become a servant of the servant of the Lord and remain in touch with pure devotee. (7.9.24 P)
Complete absorption in Kṛṣṇa
Kṛṣṇa-graha-gṛhītātmā
o Since his mind was always affected by Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he couldn’t understand how the
world goes on absorbed in sense gratification. (7.4.37)
o He sometimes cried, sometimes laughed, sometimes expressed jubilation and sometimes sang
loudly. (7.4.39)
Govinda-parirambhitaḥ
o Prahlāda being always embraced by the Lord, he did not know how his bodily necessities,
such as sitting, walking, eating, lying down, drinking and talking, were being automatically
performed. (7.4.38)
o He was always protected by the Supreme Lord just as a child on the lap of his father or
mother. (7.5.41 P)
o He had Full faith in the Lord’s protection (7.9.22 P)
o Nārada Muni told devatās that they will not be able to kill child Prahlāda even in the womb.
(7.7.10)
HIRAṆYAKAŚIPU
Family: Hiraṇyakaśipu had four wonderful, well-qualified sons, of whom the one named
Prahlāda was the best. His wife was Kayādhu. (7.4.30)
Interest: Hiraṇyakaśipu was simply interested in gold and sense enjoyment. The word hiraṇya
means "gold," and kaśipu refers to soft cushions and bedding on which people enjoy sense
gratification. (7.5.18)
Different births: The associates of Lord Viṣṇu, Jaya and Vijaya, had descended to the material
world to serve the Lord by fulfilling His desire to fight. Their three different births were: first as
Hiraṇyākṣa and Hiraṇyakaśipu, second as Rāvaṇa and Kumbhakarṇa, and third as Śiśupāla and
Dantavakra (7.1.35 P)
Inimical to Viṣṇu
o Hiraṇyakaśipu accused the Lord of being partial to devatās because the devatās worshiped
Him. (7.2.6 P)
o Hiraṇyakaśipu thought that the Lord can change His mind at any time and therefore His words
and activities are like those of children. (7.2.7-8P)
o He wanted to offer blood of Viṣṇu to please his brother Hiraṇyākṣa. (7.2.7-8)
Demoniac plans
o Hiraṇyakaśipu planned to kill the inhabitants of earth so that yajña would stop and the
devatās, being disturbed, would die automatically when Lord Viṣṇu, the yajñeśvara, was
killed. (7.2.10 P)
o Hiraṇyakaśipu planned to destroy the brahminical culture and the kṣatriya government and
thus create chaos all over the world. (7.2.11 P)
Knowledgeable but demonic intelligence
o He was a great politician and so he knew how to act according to the time and situation
(7.2.18-19)
o He had Vedic knowledge and understanding. He gave sound advice to his family members on
his brother’s death, to pacify them. But he did not used his good intelligence for the service of
the Lord. 7.2.21P
o He carefully asked Brahmā for benedictions that will be almost as good as immortality.
(7.3.35P)
Asuric determination
o Hiraṇyakaśipu wanted to usurp the position of Lord Brahmā (7.3.10)
o He wanted to reverse the results of pious and impious acts. He wanted those promoted to the
heavenly planets, to become unhappy and suffer. (7.3.11 P)
o He wanted to destroy brahminical culture and protection of cows. (7.3.13)
Severe austerity
o Hiraṇyakaśipu's body was covered by an anthill and by grass and bamboo sticks. (7.13.15-16)
o The ants had devoured his skin, fat, flesh and blood. (7.13.15-16)
o Even Brahmā was struck with wonder to see Hiraṇyakaśipu's extraordinary power to execute
tapasya. (7.13.15-16 P)
Demoniac Power
o Hiraṇyakaśipu conquered all the planets in the three worlds (7.4.5-7)
o All the devatās except Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva and Lord Viṣṇu were forced to engage in his
service. (7.4.9-10)
o Instead of offering shares of the oblations in a sacrifice to the devatās, he accepted them
himself. (7.4.15)
o He always transgressed the laws and regulations mentioned in the authoritative śāstras.
Dissatisfied: Although so powerful and controller of all directions, was dissatisfied because
instead of controlling his senses he remained their servant. (7.4.19 P)
Relationship with Prahlāda
Plans for Prahlāda
o He wanted Prahlāda Mahārāja to be trained as a diplomatic king in ruling the kingdom.
(7.5.51P)
o Hiraṇyakaśipu wanted to keep Prahlāda in mundane attachment. (7.5.51 P)
Affectionate attitude towards son changed
o When he saw that his son has become devotee of Viṣṇu, he threw him off his lap and onto the
ground and ordered him to be killed. (7.5.33-34)
o He was perplexed about how his five-year-old boy could be so fearless that he did not care for
the order of his very great and powerful father. (7.8.6 P)
Delivered by son: Although Hiraṇyakaśipu was extremely inimical toward the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, he always thought of his son, Prahlāda, who was a great devotee. By the
grace of his son, he was delivered by the Lord. (7.1.26 P)
2. KṚṢṆA’S NAMES
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Kṛṣṇa is unlimited and so are His names. Unlike an
ordinary human, the Lord’s names indicate His various forms, qualities and activities. It is
amazing to note how many different ways Śukadeva Gosvāmī, Nārada Muni and others in the
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam addressed and described the Supreme Lord. These names reflect His
personal attributes and divine character. The following is a list of prominent names of Lord
Kṛṣṇa and His special form as Nṛsiṁha-deva, as described the Seventh Canto. Although some of
these names appear repeatedly, only one instance of the name is given below.
3. ANALOGIES
Conveying a message becomes simple and easy when explained through an analogy. We find
analogies used commonly in our scriptures and even day-to-day life. Several speakers in the
Bhāgavatam like Śukadeva Gosvāmī and Nārada Muni used fitting analogies to present deep
philosophical points and Śrīla Prabhupāda further elaborates on these messages with
contemporary analogies the modern man can relate to. The following is a list of analogies from
the verses and purports of the Seventh Canto of Śrīmad Bhāgavatam.
Note:Subjects/ objects/ things marked with same color are compared with each other
within a particular analogy. Example: Fire – Lord, friction – krpa-śakti.
ABOUT THE SUPREME LORD
1. The sun drives away the darkness of the universe, similarly the Lord always drives away
all the darkness of ignorance. (7.13.22)
2. Just as real law is that which is given by the government, the real religion is that which is
given by the Supreme Lord. (7.15.13 P)
3. Just as a desire tree delivers fruits according to one's desires, the Lord offer benedictions
according to the level of one's service. (7.9.27 P)
4. An electrician connects both a heater and a cooler to the same electrical energy. The cause
of the heating and cooling is his manipulation of the electrical energy. The Supreme Lord
is equal to everyone. When the devatās are favored and the demons are killed, this is not
His partiality but the influence of time. (7.1.12 P)
5. A criminal is put in prison and punished by the government, but the same government, if it
likes, can release him. Similarly, our material condition of suffering has been allotted to us
by the Supreme Lord, and if we want to be saved from this suffering, we must appeal to
Him. (7.9.22 P)
6. One can understand the supply of fire in wood, the water in a waterpot, or the sky within a
pot. Similarly an expert thinker can perceive how the Supreme Lord is present within the
heart of every living being. (7.1.9)
7. When cotton is transformed into thread, the cotton is no longer visible, and when the thread
is woven into cloth, the thread is no longer visible. Similarly, the seed that had generated
from the navel of Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu became manifested as the cosmic creation, one
could no longer understand where the cause of the cosmos is. (7.9.34 P)
8. Worms captured by a black drone obtain the same type of body as the drone. Similarly,
demons killed by the Supreme Lord receive spiritual bodies and forms same as the Lord,
because of thinking about the Him at death. (7.10.39)
ABOUT THE LIVING ENTITIES
9. The moon and the sun are extremely brilliant and can be directly perceived, but when
covered by clouds, they are not distinctly visible. Similarly, the more one advances in
goodness, the more his brilliance is exhibited by bhakti, but the more one is covered by
passion and ignorance, the less visible his brilliance. (7.1.9 P)
10. A grassworm confined in a hole by a bee always thinks of the bee in fear and enmity and
later becomes a bee. Similarly, if the conditioned souls somehow or other think of Kṛṣṇa
as their worshipable Lord or even an enemy, by such constant thinking they will regain their
spiritual bodies. (7.1.28-29)
11. Just as many travelers come together in a restaurant, and later continue to their respective
destinations, the living entities join together in a family, and later, as a result of their own
actions, they are led apart to their destinations. (7.2.21)
12. Criminal prisoners scatter as soon as their terms are over and they are released. Similarly,
all of us who have temporarily assembled as family members will continue to our respective
destinations. (7.2.21)
13. A householder, although different from the identity of his house, thinks his house to be
identical with him. Similarly, the conditioned soul, due to ignorance, accepts the body to
be himself, although the body is actually different from the soul. (7.2.42 P)
14. Just as fire in wood is different from the wood, as air within the mouth and nostrils is
separate, and as the all-pervading sky never mixes with anything, similarly, the living
entity, although now encaged within the material body, is separate from it. (7.2.43 P)
15. Just as every part of the body is meant to serve the whole body, similarly every living
entity, being part of the Supreme Lord, is meant to serve the Lord. (7.5.11 P)
16. Just as there is no difficulty in establishing intimate relationship between a father and son,
there is no difficulty in re-establishing the natural, intimate relationship between Supreme
Lord and the living entities. (7.6.19 P)
17. Just as a drop of seawater is composed of the same chemicals as the great sea itself, the
living entities have the same qualities as the Lord. (7.7.20 P)
18. One can understand the presence of the air by the aromas it carries. Similarly, one can
understand the living soul by three divisions of intelligence i.e. wakefulness, dreaming and
deep sleep under the guidance of Supreme Lord. (7.7.26)
19. Just as there are different grades of fire, but all of them derive heat and light from the sun,
all living entities, big or small, are dependent on the mercy of the Supreme Lord. (7.8.7 P)
20. Just as small piece of grass falls in a river and is tossed about with different types of
wood and tree branches, similarly, the living entity floats in the ocean of material
existence and is dashed and tossed amidst material conditions. (7.13.24)
21. Just as a deer cannot see the water within a well covered by grass, but runs after water
elsewhere, the living entity covered by the material body does not see the happiness
within himself, but runs after happiness in the material world. (7.13.29)
22. Just as a wheel sometimes goes up and sometimes comes down, similarly the stringent laws
of material nature makes the living entity in material existence sometimes happy and
sometimes distressed. (7.13.30 P)
MATERIAL CONDITIONING
23. Just as both gold and iron are metal, but there is a vast difference in their value, so, there is
difference in lusty desires of the gopīs and material lusty desires. (7.1.31 P)
24. Fruits and flowers of a tree in due course of time undergo six changes—birth, existence,
growth, transformation, dwindling and then death. Similarly the material body, which is
obtained by the spirit soul, undergoes similar changes. (7.7.18 P)
25. A person who has many wives is troubled when they try to attract him in their own way.
Similalry, a yogi is also troubled when the tongue is attracted to palatable dishes; the
genitals to sex, the sense of touch to contact with soft things; the belly, although filled, still
wants to eat more; the ear attracted to cinema songs and so on. (7.9.40)
THE SUPREME LORD’S PROTECTION
26. Just as a patient dies in spite of a good physician and good medicine, similarly if the
Supreme Lord does not give one protection, one must suffer in spite of the presence of his
father and mother. (7.2.55 P)
27. Just as a father and mother cannot protect their child, a physician and medicine cannot
relieve a suffering patient, a boat on the ocean cannot protect a drowning man, similarly
those not cared by Lord cannot do anything for their betterment. (7.9.19)
THE DEVATĀS
28. One has to follow the laws made by the government, not by the officers. Similarly,
everyone has to worship to the Supreme Lord only, not the devatās. (7.3.24 P)
29. If a dog is swimming in the water and one wants to cross the ocean by catching hold of the
dog's tail, certainly he is foolish. Similarly, in distress if one seeks shelter of a devatā, he
is foolish. (7.4.21 P)
ABOUT THE DEVOTEES
30. Just as the moon never refuses to distribute its pleasing rays even to the home of a caṇḍāla,
similarly a devotee never refuses to act for everyone's welfare. (7.4.31-32 P)
31. Everything appears yellow to the jaundiced eye. Similarly, to a pure devotee, everyone
appears to be engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service. (7.4.37 P)
32. Just as a materialistic person is always absorbed in thoughts of material gain, similarly a
pure devotee is always absorbed in thoughts of Kṛṣṇa. (7.4.37 P)
33. A cow that is cared for by her master is not in anxiety over its maintenance and always
devoted to its master, only for the master's benefit. Similarly, one who has no motive
other than to serve the Lord surrenders everything to the Lord and acts only to please Him.
(7.5.23-24 P)
34. An expert geologist can understand where there is gold and by various processes can
extract it from the gold ore. Similarly, a spiritually advanced person can also understand
how the spiritual particle exists within the body, and thus by cultivating spiritual
knowledge he can attain perfection in spiritual life. (7.7.21)
35. An iron rod put into a fire becomes like fire. Similarly, when a devotee constantly engages
in bhakti, he no longer has any material activities, for his body is spiritualized. (7.7.36 P)
36. Just as those who are greedy see everything as a source of money-making and those
who are lusty see everything as being conducive to sex, similarly the most perfect devotee,
Prahlāda saw Nārāyaṇa even within a stone column. (7.7.55 P)
37. Lion is very fearsome for other animals, but its cubs are not at all afraid of the lion. The
water of the sea is certainly dreadful for all living entities on the land, but within the sea
even the small fish is unafraid. Similarly, the Lord sometimes assumes a fierce appearance
to kill the demons, but the devotees take pleasure in worshipping and glorifying the Lord in
any form, either pleasing or fierce. (7.9.15 P)
38. If one's face is decorated, the reflection of one's face in a mirror is also seen to be
decorated. Similarly, when something is offered to Lord, it is for the benefit of the
devotee, for the Lord does not need service from anyone. (7.9.11)
39. Just as a person inherits his father's property, a Kṛṣṇa conscious devotee, undisturbed by
dualities, is sure to return back to Godhead. (7.9.31 P)
40. Just as a wise man, by considering cause and effect, can see how fire pervades wood,
similarly those engaged in devotional service understand how the Lord is both the cause
and effect. (7.9.47)
41. For a person who has suitable shoes on his feet, there is no danger even when he walks on
pebbles and thorns. Similarly, for one who is always self-satisfied there is no distress;
indeed, he feels happiness everywhere. (7.15.17)
42. If someone considers the Supreme Lord to be an ordinary human being, this does not mean
He becomes ordinary. Similarly, if the family members of the spiritual master consider
him as an ordinary human being, this does not mean that he becomes an ordinary. (7.15.27
P)
MATERIAL DESIRES AND ATTACHMENTS
43. Blind men guided by another blind man miss the right path and fall into a ditch. Similarly,
persons who are strongly entrapped by material life, and who have accepted a leader or
guru attached to external sense objects, cannot understand the goal of life. (7.5.31)
44. If one continuously sprinkles drops of ghee on a fire, the fire will not be extinguished, but if
one suddenly puts a lump of ghee on a fire, the fire may possibly be extinguished entirely.
Similarly, those who are too sinful are allowed to enjoy sinful activities fully, for thus there
is a chance that these activities will become detestful to them, and they will get the
opportunity to be purified. (7.11.33-34)
45. Just like a silkworm, which weaves a cocoon in which it becomes imprisoned, similarly
the attached householder simply for the satisfaction of his genitals and tongue is bound by
material conditions. (7.6.11-13)
BHAKTI
46. When one takes up spiritual activities, one's entire material body is spiritualized.
Similarly, in this material world, when Kṛṣṇa consciousness expands, the entire material
world becomes spiritualized. (7.9.33 P
47. The idea that the rope is a snake is false, but the snake is not false. Similarly this world,
which is full of varieties, is not false; it is a reflection of the reality in the spiritual world.
(7.15.58 P)
GENERAL WISDOM
48. Although a medicinal herb does not belong to the same category as a man, if beneficial it is
kept very carefully. Similarly, if someone outside one's family is favorable, he should be
given protection like a son. On the other hand, if a limb of one's body is poisoned by
disease, it must be amputated so that the rest of the body may live happily. Similarly, even
one’s own son, if unfavorable, must be rejected, although born of one's own body.
(7.5.37)
49. Just as it is dangerous to feed milk to a snake, similarly it is dangerous to give benedictions
to demons, who are by nature ferocious and jealous. (7.10.30)
50. If a tiger kills a man this is not sinful, but if a man kills another man this is considered
sinful, and the killer is hanged. Similarly, the men of the lower classes, are accustomed to
stealing, drinking and illicit sex, but that is not considered sinful. (7.10.31)
51. A python, although lying in one place, not endeavoring for its livelihood, gets the food it
needs to maintain body and soul. Similarly, if a man is poor, he should not endeavor to
improve his economic condition because one who is desireless also obtains his livelihood
without endeavor. (7.15.15)
52. Just as professional activities or business profits cannot help one in spiritual advancement
but are a source of material entanglement, so, the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies cannot help
anyone who is not a devotee of the Supreme Lord. (7.15.29)
53. In general warfare one must take help from his chariot and horses in order to conquer his
enemy, and after that he may give up the chariot and its paraphernalia. Similarly, as long as
one has a human body, one should fully use it to obtain the highest perfection of life,
namely going back to Godhead. (7.15.45 P)
AUTHOR’S PROFILE
Gauranga Darshan Das, a disciple of His Holiness Radhanath Swami, is a spiritual author and
sastric teacher. He holds a Master’s degree from the Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore.
He is a monk at ISKCON Govardhan Ecovillage (GEV) and serves as the Dean of the
Bhaktivedanta Vidyapitha.
He teaches Bhagavad-gita, Srimad Bhagavatam, Sri Caitanya Caritamrita, Vaishnava character
and other spiritual subjects. He has written over 20 books including the ‘Subodhini’ series of
study guides, ‘Pravaha’ series of story books, self-enrichment books like ‘Bhagavata Viveka’
and ‘Disapproved but not Disowned,’ and children’s books like ‘Bhagavatam Tales’ that were
sold over 100,000 copies. He has compiled the ‘Ratnamala’ series of Sloka books, and runs a
monthly ezine called ‘Bhagavata Pradipika.’
He is known for his lucid spiritual talks, thought-inspiring articles, sloka recitations, online and
residential courses both for children and adults, and video series like the Nectar Verses and
Bhagavata Pravaha. He is a regular writer for the Back To Godhead Magazine International and
Indian editions. He has guided several students in their sastric study, and has delivered over 6500
hours of spiritual discourses. He also oversees the Deity worship and Vrindavan Forest at GEV.
He is also a member of the ISKCON Board of Examinations and the ISKCON India Schoars
Board.
Connect with him on
www.gaurangadarshandas.com
www.facebook.com/gaurangadarshandas
www.instagram.com/gaurangadarshandas
t.me/GaurangaDarshanDas
BOOKS BY THE AUTHOR
STUDY GUIDES – SUBODHINI SERIES
Gītā Subodhinī
Īśopaniṣad Subodhinī
Upadeśāṁṛta Subodhinī
Bhakti Rasāmṛta Subodhinī
Caitanya Subodhinī (4 Volumes)
Bhāgavata Subodhinī (10 volumes)
The Ten Topis of Śrīmad Bhāgavatam
STORY BOOKS
Bhāgavata Pravāha
Caitanya Pravāha
Disapproved But Not Disowned
Bhāgavata Viveka
Bhāgavatam Tales
SLOKA BOOKS
(Pocket Size)
Gītā Ratnamālā
Bhāgavata Ratnamālā (2 volumes)
Caitanya Ratnamālā
Bhāgavata Tattvamālā
