--- SOURCE: BHAGAVATA-SUBODHINI-4/index.html ---
BHAGAVATA-SUBODHINI-4
sa uttamasloka m a h a n - m u k h a - c y u t o
bhavat-padámbhoja-sudhá kanánílah
smrtim punar v i s m r t a - t a t t v a - v a r t m a n á m
kuyoginárii no v i t a r a t y alam v a r a i h                     /
/   7
M y dear Lord, You are glorified by the selected verses uttered by great
personalities. Such glorification of Your lotus feet is just like saffron
particles. When the transcendental vibration from the mouths of great
devotees carries the aroma of the saffron dust of Your lotus feet, the
forgetful living entity gradually remembers his eternal relationship with
You. Devotees thus gradually come to the right conclusion about the value
of life. M y dear Lord, 1 therefore do not need any other benediction but
the opportunity to hear from the mouth of Your pure devotee. [SB 4.20.25]
BHAGAVATA S U B O D H I N I
Have a bird's eye v i e w of the S r i m a d - B h á g a v a t a m C a n t o s
E x p l o r e the I n t e r c o n n e c t i o n s b e t w e e n different S e c t i o n s
F a m i l i a r i z e y o u r s e l f w i t h the F l o w of v e r s e s i n a c h a p t e r
D i v e deep into the A u t h e n t i c i m p o r t s of V i t a i v e r s e s
Delight o n the Thematic perspectives a n d C o m p i l a t i o n s
M a r v e l at the r i c h n e s s of characters, holy n a m e s a n d analogies
This publication is a precious jewel, both adding to the unlimited radiance of
Krishna's presence as Srimad-Bhagavatam and reflecting that splendour. What is
special: the clarity of both the text and its graphic presentation, enahling a full and
penetrating comprehension of the Bhagavatam's structure and profundity.
- HH Devamrita Swami
I am sincerely grateful to the Bhaktivedanta Vidyapitha for their dedicated efforts to
present this publication - Bhagavata Subodhini. I pray that each reader may enter
deeper and deeper into the knowledge and devotional love (Bhakti Ras) of the essence
of all Vedas - Srimad Bhagavatam.
- HH Radhanath Swami
B H A G A V A T A S U B O D H I N I is a praiseworthy project for deepening our
appreciation of the Bhagavatam, particularly from the insight of Srila Visvanatha
Cakravarti. By concisely organizing his analysis of the work, the devotee will he ahle
to relish both the Bhagavatam and Visvanatha's realizations. Caitanya Mahaprabhu
has accepted Bhagavatam as the main pramana since it is the conclusion of all
scriptures. By understanding its import the devotee will he ahle to grasp the theology,
practice and goal of the Vedic tradition in a most compact form.
- HH Bhanu Swami
pibata bhagavatam     rasamalayam
Bhagavata Subodhini is an excellent study guide that makes Srimad Bhagavatam
more relishahle and easier to digest. Drawing strength from the Bhaktivedanta
Purports and Bhagavad commentaries hy Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura,
Bhagavata Subodhini is a great tool for an in-depth, systematic and scrutinising study
of Srimad Bhagavatam. I strongly recommend this masterpiece for one and all, young
and old, alike. M y hearty congratulations to the Bhaktivedanta Vidyapitha team of
Govardhan Eco-village for this invaluahle publication. I pray that they do not stop till
the goal of puhlishing guides for all the twelve cantos is reached.
- HH Lokanatha Swami
Bhagavata   Sul,uclhinl||^|J|^|f|}^^^
Given the importance of the Bhagavata Purana and the increase in generál interest in
its content, study guides such as the present publication are to he enthusiastically
welcomed hy students of the text. The initial two volumes of Bhagavata-Suhodhini,
comprising the first three skandhas of the Bhagavata, offer a chapter-hy-chapter
analysis, with a more detailed focus on the most significant verses. Such volumes will
he most useful for classes and workshops.
- Prof. Paul Sherbow, Rutgers University
I found Bhagavata Subodhini very interesting and useful, for it presents the contents
of Bhagavatam in a systematic and lucid manner. I am very happy that the devotees
in our society are producing such wonderful literature hased on Srila Prabhupada's
hooks and commentaries of other acharyas. I like the fact that in one book I have
access to commentaries of different acaryas, that too presented in an interesting
tahular formát which made it easy and clear to read. This book is like a Bhagavatam
digest. It helps the preachers in their presentations on Bhagavatam. I wish I had
access to such hooks hefore. I encourage devotees to come together, for this kind of
study and contemplation on the Bhagavatam.
- HH Bhakti Purushottama Swami
It is a guide, I use to get a hird's eye view of a Chapter, to spot out Diamond like
sections for deeper contemplation and nectar like slokas for relishing and repeating to
others. It has increased my appetite for Bhagavatam study and gain great spiritual
advantage. Thanks to Bhaktivedanta Vidyapitha for their dedicated efforts in making
Srila Prabhupada's master piece work more easy and accessihle for all. Hare Krishna.
- HG Radheshyam Das
B H A G A V A T A
S U B O D H I N I
Ennening   the Experience                of Srimad-Bhagavatam                   study
CANTO 4
HP*-
BHAKTI                                   EDANTA
IDYAPITHA
T R U T H   •   T R A D I T I O N   •   T R A N s F o R M AT io N
Bhagavata Subodhini
¥Xi?.,,7éí
For more details, kindly correspond with:
Bhaktivedanta Vidyapitha
Govardhan Eco Village
Galtare, Hamrapur (P.O),
Wada (Taluka), Paighar (District),
BHAKTI^/EDANTA
421303 - Maharashtra, India
IDYAPITHA            www.vidyapitha.in, www.ecovillage.org.in
TRADlTfON   •   TRANSFORMATION
Email: info@vidyapitha.in
Published and Printed by:
Tulsi Books
(A division of Sri Tulsi Trust)
7. K. M. Munshi marg,
TUÍÍi1              Girgaum Chowpatty
Mumbai - 400007
Books           www.tulsibooks.com
Email: tulsibookssales@gmail.com
© 2016, Sri Tulsi Trust
Copyrigbts for all the content and artwork in this book belong to Sri Tulsi Trust.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system
or transmitted in any form, or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording
or otberwise) without the prior written permission of Sri Tulsi Trust.
The images of Prthu Maháraja, Lord Siva, Dhurva Mahárája and the Pracetás on the front
and back covers are the stone carvings on the Garbhagriha (sanctum santorium) of Sri Sri
Radha Vrindaban Behari temple at Govardhan Eco Village
Book Trust, Used with Permission.
BHAGAVATA SUBODHINI CANTO 4
ISBN: 978-93-81283-30-1
First Edition - July 2016: 2,000 Copies
Dedicated            to
HIS DIVINE G R A C E
A.   C.   BHAKTIVEDANTA SWAMI                    PRABHUPADA
Founder Acharya: International Society for Krishna Consciousness
yair idrsí bhagavato gatir átma-váda
ekántato nigamíbhih pratípádita nah
tusyantv adabhra-karunáh sva-krtena nityaríi
ko náma tat pratikaroti vinoda-pátram
How can such persons, who have rendered unlimited service by explaining the path of self-
realization in relation to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and whose explanations are
given for our enlightenment with complete conviction and Vedic evidence, be repaid except
by földed palms containing water for their satisfaction? Such great personalities can be
satisfied only by their own activities, which are distributed amongst humán society out of
their unlimited mercy.
[Srimad-Bhágavatam 4.22.47]
Srimad-Bhágavatam     4.22.47, yair idrsi... describes our disqualification to sufficiently
thank Srila Prabhupada and Srila Visvanátha Cakravarti Thakura for enahling us to
access the wealth of Srimad-Bhágavatam        with their enlightened commentaries; yet
from the core of our hearts, we express our deepest gratitude to all the acaryas. We
also thank His Holiness Bhánu Swami Mahárája who translated                 Sárártha-darsini
commentary into English. We thank His Grace Bhürijana Prabhu for his phenomenal
work "Unveiling His Lotus Feet" that provided us the guidelines to systematically
study the first four cantos of    Srimad-Bhágavatam.
We owe a millión thanks to H i s Holiness Rádhánátha Swami Mahárája for
envisaging and guiding the Govardhan Eco Village project that offers a perfect
amhience for sástric study. H i s emphasis on the mood and spirit of studying Srimad-
Bhágavatam as exemplified hy our Gosvámis, has been a great source of inspiration
for U S . Our heartfelt gratitude to Gauránga Prabhu, who euvisioued and directed
Bhaktivedáuta Vidyápitha, and inspired thousands of devotees with his study and
discourses ou Srimad-Bhágavatam.      We thank all the teachers of Bhaktivedáuta
Vidyápitha for their cousisteut efforts in explaining Srimad-Bhágavatam        to the
students. We thank Radhesyám Prabhu not only for all the encouragement he has
given for the making of the book, but also for his valuable presence at Bhaktivedáuta
Vidyápitha for two full years.
Our thanks to the entire Tulsi Books team for puhlishing this book. It is not possible
to name all the devotees at Govardhan Eco Village for supporting our study of
Srimad-Bhágavatam      at Bhaktivedáuta Vidyápitha and thus in the making of
Bhágavata Subodhini. With földed palms we seek the hiessings of all the devotees to
continue our service to Srimad-Bhágavatam,  Srila Prahhupáda and his mission.
- Bhaktivedanta Vidyápitha Team
Contents
^   A b o u t Bhaktivedanta VidyápTtha         8
About Bhágavata Subodhini             12
^   A b o u t the Fourth C a n t o   18
Srimad-Bhágavatam Canto 4                     Overview
Verse-by-verse O v e r v i e w with Flowcharts             23
Special Verses
Á c á r y a s ' explanations on Select verses     219
^   Thematic Compilations
Cross sectional O v e r v i e w of Specific T h e m e s     229
^   Appendix
Character portrayals, Kfsna's N a m e s , Analogies              257
A B O U T BHAKTIVEDANTA V I D Y Á P I T H A *
On 21 May 1969, H i s Divine Grace A . C . Bhaktivedanta Swami Prahhupáda arrived
at New Vrindahan, West Virginia, U.S.A, on his first visit to the mountain asrama.
This asrama was the first farm community of the International Society for Krsna
Consciousness in the West. Srila Prahhupáda had numerous ideas and desires on how
to develop this community as a replica of Vrndávana in India. Having left Vrndávana
in 1965 to spread the glories of Lord Krsna, Srila Prahhupáda now set forth to
manifest Vrndávana - and the spirit of loving devotional service - in all parts of the
world.
"1 am so glad to learn that one gentleman is going to open an ashram in
the West Virginia, and he has secured a big tract of land, 320 acres, and
I wish that this tract of land may be turnéd into New Vrindaban. You
have New York, New England, and so many "New" duplicates of
European countries in the USA; why not import New Vrindaban in your
countryf
(Letter to Hayagriva, 17 March 1968)
Srila Prahhupáda shared this vision for New Vrindahan with his disciples on various
occasions. I n his letters to Hayagriva, Kirtanánanda and a few others hetween 1968
and 1973, Prahhupáda emphasized several times on the various vitai aspects of farm
communities, namely - Cow protection, Sustainahle Agriculture (producing own
food), Simple Village Life (Plain living, High thinking - saving time for spiritual
advancement), a Place of Pilgrimage (a replica of Vrndávana, with all major temples
and kundas), a Place of Higher learning (Rüpánuga Vidyápitha and Theistic school)
and ultimately a place for people to develop their love for Krsna.
Focusing on the education aspect, Srila Prahhupáda wrote to Aniruddha on 4
Fehruary 1969, ahout his desire for a well-estahlished system of education specifically
dedicated to sástric study or the study of the Vaisnava literatures. "...we can start a
theological school also, along with a boys primary school. Our theological school will
regularly teach our published books, such as Bhagavad-gita As It Is, Srimad-
Bhagavatam, Teachings of Lord Caitanya, Nectar of Devotion, Brahma Samhita, and
Krishna. We wish to hold examinations and award titles such as Bhakti-sastri,                      Bhakti-
vaibhava, and Bhaktivedanta.          The whole program will continue for seven                years..."
Desiring to impiement this vision of Srila Prahhupáda, His Holiness Rádhánátha
Swami Mahárája directed I S K C O N Chowpatty to begin a farm community called
Govardhan Eco Village ( G E V ) , focusing on the above-mentioned vitai aspects. Since
its inception in 2003, G E V has made steady progress in the areas of cow protection
and organic farming. In 2009, G E V began its full-scale focus on the deveiopment of a
retreat center which is successfuUy running now. I n recent years, Govardhan Eco
Village replicated Vrndávana forest with its seven main temples, Govardhana Hill
and Yamuna River and gained local as well as International popularity. The
educational aspects at G E V include - the activities of L N H O School for under-
privileged rural children and the rural outreach programs conducted in over 30
villages around G E V . I n 2012, Bhaktivedáuta Vidyápitha was established at G E V as
an addition to I S K C O N Chowpatty's training program for the newly joined monks.
BHAKTI                    EDANTA
IDYÁPlTHA                  G O V A R D H A N
TRUTH   .   TRADITION   .   TRANsFoRMATioN         E   C   O   V   I   L   L   A   G   E
Bhaktivedáuta Vidyápitha is a two-year, full time study course at Govardhan Eco
Village. It covers the systematic study of Srimad-Bhágavatam       and Sri Caitanya-
caritámrta     translated and commented by Srila Prahhupáda. I n addition,
commentaries by ácáryas like Srila Visvanátha Cakravarti Thákura are incorporated
in the syllabus to enrich the understanding of the students. The course is based on a
" 5 S " model to help provide a wholesome, all-round deveiopment scheme for a sincere
practitioner of bhakti and the principles of truth, tradition and transformation to
delineate the core values behind the Bhaktivedáuta Vidyápitha's vision and mission.
T R U T H      . T R A D I T I O N . T R A N S F O R M S T I O N
Our philosophy and practice of it is governed by an important fact - we cannot
invent God, a religion and the practices that support it. It must come from the actual
source itself. Thus, we follow a triad to qualify what we speak and practice - sástra
- guru - sádhu: one has to verify all spiritual matters according to the instructions of
the scriptures (sástra), the spiritual master (guru) and the saintly persons (sádhu).
X*i
I"""                                   WÍMMÍMMÍMMÉM^
This ancient Vedic measure ensures that instructions and practice should not differ at
any point from the above-mentioned three and should always reconcile. Thus, we are
sure that we are following a genuine path. By following such a hona fide path one's
character will be transformed like that of a sadhu, a saintly person. Truth, Tradition
and Transformation are symbolic equivalents for sástra, guru and sádhu respectively.
VISION
Inspiring and inculcating Vaisnava qualities and a mood of selfless service
in the followers of the International Society for Krsna Consciousness, by
creating a strong sástric foundation for their spiritual lives.
MISSION
Assisting the devotees in understanding the glorious contribution of Srila
Prabhupáda's books, by systematically studying them and contemplating
practical ways for application of their teachings through an effective
educational framework as envisaged by the Caudiya Vaisnava parampará.
T H E   "5S"   M O D E L
rSilírÖHÍÍ'^^^^                                              Bhaktivedanta Vidyapitha
LIX?Vc53>^Lc35-!l^
The Svádhyáya aspect, involves five elements -
a.   Sravanam (Hearing) - Daily classes are conducted progressing verse by verse
along with discussions on the purports. Special seminars covering important
topics for character deveiopment such as leadership, Vaisnava dealings, etc.
are organized once a mouth.
b. Mananam (Recollection) - Daily closed book tests are conducted based on
the previous day's coverage of the syllabus to ensure the students' regulát
study. In addition, a weekly review is organized to recap the week's study.
c.   Nididhyásanam (Contemplation) - Vidyápitha studies also include a channel
to express one's gathered learning in the form of open book essays and
assignments. Students are required to sift through the canto looking for
common themes, or elaborating on a notable phrase based on what they have
studied and learnt.
d.   Pathanam (Recitation) - N o Vedic institution is complete without recitation
of scriptural verses. A t Bhaktivedáuta Vidyápitha, students daily recite select
verses from the on-going section of the Bhagavatam.
e.   Kirtanam (Speaking) - The students are also trained in communication skills
and impromptu speech and thought, by asking them to present on various
topics or themes at regular intervals.
Sádhana involves the standard spiritual practices in I S K C O N such as the morning
program, which consists of attending mangala-árati, cbanting japa and attending the
guru-püjá and temple's morning Srimad-Bhágavatam    class.
Sevá consists of voluntary work in various departments at G E V , such as serving
cows, agricultural exposure, maintenance or facilitating the visiting guests.
Sanga is developed by encouraging students to study in groups and work in teams for
projects. This fosters team work and strengthens this element.
Sadácára aspect involves the overall practice of the other four elements, grooming the
student's interpersonal skills, and encouraging one's dealings based on respect,
gratitude and interdependence for mutual growth and sustenance. Special classes on
sadácára are also conducted for the students.
Bhaktivedáuta Vidyápitha has been a dream come true for many devotees who desire
to study the Bhaktivedáuta Purports. I n sight of this, an online Bhágavatam course
[vidyapitha.in) has been made available, where students can study at their
convenience.
A B O U T BHÁGAVATA SUBODHINÍ
The Srimad-Bhagavatam     is the ripened fruit of the desire tree of the Vedic scriptures.
This transcendental literature is nondifferent from Lord Krsna, who has returned in
the form of this book (sri-krsna      parivartitd)    to shed light on the misdirected
civilization of Kali-yuga. It was compiled by the literary incarnation of Godhead,
Srila Vyásadeva in the maturity of his knowledge. The study of Bhágavatam,            done in
line with the explanations of hona fide ácáryas      in the Vaisnava parampará,     gives the
sincere reader an unparalleled understanding of the Absolute Truth, which is not
possible by one's own speculative efforts. I n fact it is Lord Krsna Himself who speaks
through the disciplic succession to enlighten the serious students of the      Bhágavatam.
The   Bhágavatam    has   gained   its prominence        amongst    modern    philosophers,
theologians and historians due to the unprecedented efforts of H i s Divine Grace A . C .
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prahhupáda, the íounátt-ácárya            of the International Society
for Krsna Consciousness ( I S K C O N ) . He personally undertook the herculean task of
translating and providing an English commentary for this voluminous masterpiece,
which was originally rendered in the Sanskrit language. He unveiled to the English-
speaking world the secrets of Vedic culture that focused on perfecting the humán
form of life.
Having begun his society in the Bowery, a run-down suburb of New Y o r k City,
Bhaktivedanta Swami delivered daily classes on the Bhágavatam,          where most of his
audiences were the beatniks of the counter culture - fondly known as the hippies.
They took to the illuminating radiance of the Bhágavatam           and while basking in its
splendour, the hippies began to turn a new leaf. Society witnessed their change in
character, appearance and behaviour. Having once been a thorn in the social body of
the New Yorkers, the hippies, now became full-fledged contributing members of
society. Their incredible transformation became the first proof of the            Bhágavatam's
immense potency - something unseen by the study of any other literature.
'''iíhtf'áv''jt7
üli                                       About Bhágavata Subodhini
BHÁGAVATAM C O M P A R E D T G THE L O R D ' S B O D Y
The Srimad-Bhagavatam is a classic that is ahle to churn out endless lessons on life,
personal inspirations, philosophical knowledge and most importantly the meaning of
life. Its glories are limitless and it presents the rarest knowledge about the identity,
nature and character of the Supreme Creator, the Supreme Lord Sri Krsna. The
Srimad-Bhagavatam has twelve cantos, which represent the different limbs of the
transcendental body of the Supreme Lord.
pádau yadiyau prathama-dvitiyau              trtiya-türyau kathitau yad-ürü
nábhis tathd pancama eva sastho             bhujántaram dor-yugalam tathdnyau
kanthas tu rdjan navamo yadiyo              mukháravindam        dasamah praphullam
ekddaso yasya laldta-pattam          siro'pi tu dvádasa eva bháti
tam ádidevarh karuná-nidhdnarh               tamála-varnarh          suhitávatáram
apdra-samsdra-samudra-setum               bhajámahe       bhágavata-svarüpam
"The First and Second Cantos of the Bhagavatam are Sri Krsna's lotus feet.
Sixth Canto is His chest. The Seventh and Eighth Cantos are His arms. The
Ninth Canto is His throat. The Tenth Canto is His beautiful lotus-face. The
Eleventh Canto is His forehead. The Twelfth Canto is His bead. I bow down
to that Lord, the ocean of mercy whose colour is like that of a tamala tree and
who appears in this world for the welfare of all. I worship Him as the bridge
for Crossing the unfathomable ocean of matériái existence. The Bhagavatam
has appeared as His very Self." [Padma Purdna]
SRTLA P R A B H U P A D A ' S E M P H A S I S O N S Y S T E M A T I C S T U D Y
Srila Prahhupáda compared Bhagavatam study with taking darsana of the deity of
Lord Krsna, which is done gradually from His lotus feet to the lotus face. He
emphasizes a step~by-step study of the Bhagavatam in his preface to Srimad-
Bhagavatam: "Srimad-Bhagavatam begins with the definition of the ultimate source.
It is a bona fide commentary on the Veddnta-sütra           by the same author, Srila
Vyásadeva, and gradually it develops into nine cantos up to the highest state of God
realization. The only qualification     one needs to study this great book of
transcendental knowledge is to proceed step by step cautiously and not jump forward
haphazardly as with an ordinary book. It should be gone through chapter by chapter,
one after another. The reading matter is so arranged with its originál Sanskrit text, its
English transliteration, synonyms, translation and purports so that one is sure to
become a God-realized soul at the end of finishing the first nine cantos."
I      Bhágavata Subodhini     •'                            ^^^^MM^^^M^^^M^t
T H E ÁCÁRYAS' UNPARALLELED CONTRIBUTION
The Vedic Encyclopedia, Srimad-Bhagavatam               is like an ocean. Its expansive
noumenal and phenomenal subject matters with deep spiritual and philosophical
insights, make it a text for both researchers and relishers alike. Srila Prabhupada
mentions in his purport to the first verse of Bhágavatam:      "...there is no doubt about
the authority of the Bhágavatam.       Within the past five hundred years, many erudite
scholars and ácáryas like Jiva Gosvámi,      Sanátana   Gosvámi,   Visvanátha      Cakravarti,
Vallabhácárya,    and many other distinguished scholars even after the time of           Lord
Caitanya made elaborate commentaries on the Bhágavatam.            And the serious student
would do well to attempt to go through them to better relish the                transcendental
messages."
Most verses of the Bhágavatam           are given descriptive commentaries by various
Gaudiya Vaisnava ácáryas.           Amongst them is the esteemed commentator             Srila
Visvanátha Cakravarti Thákura. His explanations are devotional, relishing, logical,
highly regarded in the scholarly circles of Bhágavatam        and are often quoted in the
Bhaktivedáuta purports. He is well-known for giving connections between verses and
chapters, presenting the conversations and prayers in an interesting dialogue manner
and giving positive interpretations for the blasphemous speech of demons in their
various encounters with the Lord and His devotees. Unsurprisingly therefore,
Cakravarti Thákura's commentaries have been used for many of the supplementary
links and notes provided in Bhágavata      Subodhini for enhanced clarity.
B H Á G A V A T A S U B O D H I N I alms at helplng the reader to relish studying or reading
through the Srimad-Bhágavatam.         Lven regular readers of the Bhágavatam      might find
themselves sometimes lost in the multitudes of conversations and flashbacks,
struggling to keep track of the various personalities and episodes or understanding
the complicated technical aspects of creation, universal form, time, etc. Because of
this, readers tend to read selective sections or pastimes from the Bhágavatam           rather
than endeavouring for a systematic approach. Having taken into consideration all
these academic anomalies that inhibit one from fully delighting in the splendour of
the Bhágavatam,     the Bhaktivedáuta Vidyápitha designed a systematic framework to
present the Bhágavatam       in a lucid manner - Bhágavata   Subodhini.
About Bhágavata Subodhini
Bhágavata Subodhini simplifies the apparent complexity i n
understanding the Bhágavatam, by uncovering and integrating the
explanations of Srila Prahhupáda and the previous ácáryas, thus
catering for the taste and the needs of avid readers, scholars and even
newcomers to the Srimad-Bhágavatam.
Even one who hasn't heard of the Bhágavatam,              can read through        Bhágavata
Subodhini and develop an interest in the originál manuscript. Nevertheless, this book
is not meant to be a replacement for a detailed study of the Bhágavatam         itself, but a
complement for devotees, students and curious readers. It is therefore advised that
one simultaneously refer to the Bhágavatam     while going through this book and study
Bhágavatam      with the assistance of Bhágavata   Subodhini. We hope that this attempt
to sérve the Vaisnava community will be pleasing to all Vaisnavas. The following is a
brief description of the various features of Bhágavata    Subodhini.
OVERVIEW
This is the main section of Bhágavata     Subodhini and gives an overview of the First
and Second Cantos, while the other sections sérve as auxiliary contents that enhance
one's appreciation of the subject matter. The following are the various features in this
section:
•   Canto A t a Glancé: Overview of the entire canto, presented in a flowchart.
•   Chapter Overview chart: Provides a bird's eye view of the major sections and
subsections of a chapter.
•   Section: A group of verses that fali under the same heading.
•   Subsection: A sub-group of verses within a section
•   Verse synopsis: A brief summary of a verse that highlights its import (a
condensed version of its translation by Srila Prahhupáda and Srila Visvanátha
Cakravarti Thákura). A l l the verses are duly numbered and important keywords
of the Sanskrit verse are given in brackets.
•   L i n k : The connection between two verses, sections or subsections, which is often
taken from Srila Visvanátha Cakravarti Tháküra's Sárártha-darsini commentary.
•   Sanskrit Verse: A most vitai verse of the chapter presented in the flow, which is
worth memorizing.
•   Table: A list of items under a section
•   Flow C h a r t : Gives a bird's eye view of a sequence of events or the flow of a set
of prayers.
I       Bhágavata Subodhini   % t$* í í t 2 í ' | Í « $ f ^ / í ^ ^ ^
W                                '^ll:±i£22?Z?-7?;Z^2t^Z2l!^^
•     Note: A vitai comment or explanation on a verse or section, mainly related to
the flow of the chapter, taken from the purports of Srila Prabhupada and/or Srila
Visvanátha Cakravarti Tháküra for enhancing the understanding of those verses
or sections, their context and philosophical depth. [However, when Srila
Visvanátha Cakravarti Tháküra gives a unique and different perspective other
than the one given by Srila Prahhupáda, his name is mentioned in that Note.]
SPECIAL V E R S E S
This section contains selected verses from a canto that carry a deep and extraordinary
significance in terms of philosophy (siddhánta)              and emotion (bhdva), which would
increasingly enhance the reader's appreciation. These verses can be considered as
jewels that are found in the depths of the ocean and the ácáryas,           our guides, help us
in accessing them. We've provided a list of a few citations by the various              ácáryas
(wherever possible), focusing on the numerous ways one can understand a single
verse. These different angles of vision, in relishing the verses of the Bhágavatam,        are
the glory of the Vaisnava ácáryas              who in this way exhibit their astounding
realizations and scholarly flare. The list of citations is not exhaustive and surely all
verses of the Bhágavatam      are equally important. Nevertheless, from these few pearls
of special verses, one can get a glimpse of the vast treasures hidden in the ocean of
the    Bhágavatam.
THEMATIC COMPILATIONS
This section consists of various prominent themes that are present in a specific canto
of the Srimad-Bhágavatam.        Each compilation contains a comprehensive list of verses
on a particular theme. The objective of this section is to make the reader appreciate
the cross-sectional prominence of a specific theme revealed in various chapters of a
canto, in addition to inspiring one to study the Bhágavatam               from various angles.
These compilations are based on the analysis and research of many devotees as part
of their study in the Bhaktivedáuta Vidyápitha course.
APPENDIX
The extensive lists of reference matériái from the Bhágavatam cantos are presented in
this section. Unlike the Thematic Compilations, these materials are more or less
direct in nature with little or no analysis, such as, names of Lord Krsna, saintly
qualities and analogies. A quick overview of the main characters that appear
throughout the canto(s) are also presented. This section aims at providing an
interesting, quick, yet extensive reference guide.
About Bhágavata Subodhini
NOMENCLATURE
To keep the reading of Bhágavata          Subodhini    relatively simple, we've used the
referencing for verses in the standard "Canto, Chapter and Verse Number" formát.
The following short forms represent their equivalent expanded forms given against
them:
•   SB -     Srimad-Bhágavatam
•   C C - Sri     Caitanya-caritámrta
•   BRS -      Bhakti-rasámrta-sindhu
•   Q l - Question number 1
•   A l - Answer to Q l
•   4.2.6 - SB Canto Four, Chapter T w o , Verse Six
•   4.2.6 P - Srila Prabhupáda's purport on 4.2.6
•   4.2.6 V - Srila Vis'vanátha Cakravarti Tháküra's commentary on 4.2.6
•    '+' - indicates marriage ties.
References to other books are explicitly stated.
We humbly bow down to all the Vaisnavas and seek their blessings that this book -
with all its faults in presentation, language and grammar - is ahle to inspire one to
study the Srimad-Bhágavatam.       Srila Prahhupáda quoted the following verse in his
introduction to the Bhágavatam,       which we cite here with the faith that this book-
form of Lord Krsna will bring light into the darkness of Kali-yuga and dissipate the
ignorance in our hearts.
tad-vág-visargo   janatágha-viplavo
yasmín prati-slokam abaddhavaty api
námány anantasya yaso 'nkitáni yac
chrnvanti gáyanti grnanti sádhavah
"On the other hand, that literature which is full of descriptions of the
transcendental glories of the name, fame, forms, pastimes, etc, of the unlimited
Supreme Lord is a different creation, full of transcendental words directed toward
bringing about a revolntion in the impions lives of this world's misdirected
civilization. Such transcendental literatures, even though imperfectly composed,
are heard, sung and accepted by purified men who are thoronghly honest." {1.5.11)
We pray that our humble attempt in presenting this Bhágavata               Subodhini pleases
Srila Prahhupáda, the ácáryas and the Vaisnava community.
- Bhaktivedánta   Vidyápitha    Team
A B O U T T H E FOURTH C A N T O
T h e first two cantos of the Srimad-Bhagavatam are considered the Supreme Lord's
lotus feet and form a perfect prelude to the rest of the Bhágavatam by introducing
the reader to its key philosophical concepts and prominent characters. These cantos
also establish bhakti-yoga as the topmost spiritual path and Lord Krsna as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the fountainhead of all incarnations. Many
wonderful prayers by devotees and the Lord's reciprocation with them, the birth of
Pariksit Mahárája and his activities of chastising Kall, the history of Bhágavatam and
the circumstances in which this granthávatara     made its appearance are wonderfully
described. Furthermore, there are explanations of the process of creation, the virát-
rüpa, the catuh-sloki Bhágavatam and finally the definitions of the ten topics of the
Bhágavatam.
T h e T h i r d and the Fourth Cantos correspond to the Supreme Lord's thighs and
predominantly discuss the topics of sárga and visarga through the conversation of
Vidura and Maitreya. The Third Canto describes a variegated rangé of topics that
include creation by the Supreme Lord, subcreation by Brahmá and his sons, time,
emhryology, family life, Sánkhya, bhakti-yoga, astánga-yoga,        jitána-yoga, karma,
culture, the spiritual world, the matériái world and hell. I n the Third Canto we find
prominent Bhágavatam episodes like the pastimes of Lord Varába, the description of
Vaikunthaloka, the household life of Kardama Muni and Devahüti, and the teachings
of Lord Kapila.
Highlights of the Fourth Canto
The Fourth Canto of Srimad-Bhágavatam        is very rich in its content. It unveils the
stories of admired personalities like Lord Siva, Suniti, Dhruva, Nárada, Ahga, Prthu
and the Pracetás, who all showed extraordinary examples of devotional service. One
can also learn about the unfavourable attitudes in devotional service from the
mistakes of characters like Daksa, Suruci, Vena, Indra and Prácinabarhi. The positive
transformation undergone by many of these personalities, mainly due the intervention
riJjTií'gjTájíT^^                                         About The Fourth Canto
of devotees, add to the glory of bhakti. Furthermore, the prayers of pure devotees like
Dhruva, Prthu and the Pracetás in this canto disclose to the reader the foremost
aspiration of a devotee - to hear krsna-kathá     in the association of devotees. By
rejecting heavenly enjoyment and impersonal liberation, which are the results of the
processes of karma and jnána respectively, such prayers once again establish the
superiority of bhakti-yoga.
This canto is fiiled with the examples of many rájarsis like - Uttánapáda, Dhruva,
Ahga, Prthu, Prácinabarhi and the Pracetás - who ruled the citizens with full
responsibility, while practising devotional service and retiring in an exemplary way at
the right time for spiritual advancement. This canto also gives glorious examples of
ladies like Anasüya, Sati, Suniti, Arci and Vaidarbhi who were devoted to their
husbands with faith. Their activities also teach lessons to disciples in serving their
spiritual masters.
The transmigration of the conditioned soul due to the subtle body is wonderfully
described through the allegorical story of King Puranjana. Embedded in various
episodes of this canto are wonderful lessons for devotees in regard to positive and
negatíve qualities: pride and anger (Daksa), tolerance (Siva), disobedience (Sati),
responsibility (Brahmá), harsh speech (Suruci), patience (Suniti), determination
(Dhruva), inspiration (Nárada), regret (Uttánapáda), envy (Indra), forgiveness
(Prthu), dedication (Arci), detachment (Ahga), attachment (Prácinabarhi) and
cooperation (the Pracetás).^
The Lineage of Manu's daughters
In the Fourth Canto Maitreya continues to describe the family lines of Sváyambhuva
Manu's descendants. Manu had three daughters - Devahüti (3.21-4.1), Aküti (4.1)
and Prasüti (4.1-7) - and two sons - Uttánapáda (4.8-4.31) and Priyavrata (5.1-15).
Aküti married Prajápati Ruci and they begot Yajna and Daksina. Devahüti's nine
daughters were married to nine powerful sages. One of these nine daughters,
Anasüya, married Atri and they begot Dattátreya, Soma and Durvásá, the partial
expansions of Visnu, Brahmá and Siva respectively. Prasüti married Prajápati Daksa
and begot sixteen daughters, thirteen of which were given to Dharma and one each to
Agni, the Pitrs and Lord Siva. Sati married Lord Siva but she had no children, as she
gave up her body prematurely due to a conflict between her husband and her father
(4.1).
' Only one prominent quality of each personality is mentioned here. A detailed study would
reveal many more such qualities and lessons.
Bhágavata subodhini   f
Lord Siva - Daksa - Satí
On explaining Sati's death, Maitreya narrated the very instructive episode of Daksa's
Yajna (4.2-7). The pride, envy and resultant anger of Daksa made him blaspheme and
offend an exalted personality. Lord Siva, who in this provoking situation exemplified
the quality of tolerance (4.2). Daksa later began a sacrifice without inviting Siva, but
Sati wanted to attend. Her disobedience to her husband's good advice led to her
being dishonoured by Daksa and finally her death (4.3-4). T o rectify the perpetrators
by appropriate punishment. Lord Siva sent Virabhadra, who disrupted Daksa's
sacrifice and killed him (4.5). Such is the resuit of being proud, hard-hearted and
offensive to great souls.
Daksa's priests approached Lord Brahmá who then responsibly approached Lord Siva
to appease him (4.6). Being pleased, noble Siva, in his mood of forgiveness, restored
the destruction at the sacrifice and brought Daksa back to life, albeit with a goat's
bead. Daksa felt grateful and continued his incomplete sacrifice, in which Lord Visnu
appeared and warned Daksa to respect everyone (4.7).
Lineage of Adharma
Having completed the description of the descendants of the daughters of Manu,
Maitreya briefly describes the lineage of Adharma (Irreligion), a son of Brahmá. The
members of Adbarma's family represent unfavourable attitudes in bhakti.
The rest of the Fourth Canto describes the lineage of Uttánapáda, a son of Manu
(4.8-31).
Dhruva Mahárája
Due to attachment to his wife, Uttánapáda neither welcomed little Dhruva on his lap
nor corrected his wife, Suruci, who insulted Dhruva with harsh words. Heart-
stricken Dhruva approached his mother Suniti who immediately tried to pacify his
negatíve feelings and directed him to worship the Supreme Lord. Under Nárada's
expert direction, Dhruva performed severe austerities to attain the highest position in
the world. Obtaining the Lord's darsana, Dhruva became ecstatic, but regretted his
matériái ambitions. Such is the purifying effect of bhakti.
Lventually Uttánapáda retired and gave Dhruva the rule (4.8-9). Then his hrother
Uttama was killed by a Yaksa and Dhruva, although a great devotee, became
excessively angry and tried to annihilate all the Yaksas. However, Manu cautioned
him and Dhruva sought blessings from Kuvera, the king of the Yaksas (4.10-11).
After ruling for 36,000 years, Dhruva retired and ascended to the Lord's abode, along
with his great mother Suniti (4.12).
About The Fourth Canto
King Ahga and King Vena
Dhruva's dynasty continues with King Ahga (4.13). His wife was the daughter of
Mrtyu, and thus they begot a very cruel son, Vena. Failing to reform his son, King
Ahga saw it as the will of the Lord and renounced the kingdom. The dutiful sages
who always think of the welfare of all people enthroned Vena. But mean Vena
claimed himself to be the Supreme Lord and obstructed the worship of Lord Visnu.
Thus the sages killed him (4.13-14). Later they churned his dead body to separate out
the contamination in the form of Bahuka. From the pure portion of Vena's body,
Mahárája Prthu and Arci made their appearance.
Mahárája Prthu
Prthu and Arci are partial expansions of the Supreme Lord and H i s eternal consort
Laksmi, respectively. Various demigods offered their presentations to Prthu Mahárája
and various bards glorified him despite his humble objections (4.15-16). Prthu
becomes angry at the earth who had hidden her grains due to unrighteous rulers like
Vena. Taking her advice, Prthu milked her to extract many essential resources and
thus saw to the welfare of his hungry citizens (4.17-18). Next, Prthu initiated many
horse sacrifices and in the ninety-ninth one, envious Indra stole the sacrificiai horse
and inaugurated numerous irreligious paths. Brahmá advised King Prthu to be mature
and thus Prthu relented and gave up his ambition of performing one hundred
sacrifices (4.19). Such a submissive attitűdé is very pleasing to Lord Visnu, who then
appeared at Prthu's sacrifice and instructed him. Prthu forgave Indra wholeheartedly
and offers heartfelt prayers to the Lord (4.20). Blessed by the Lord, Prthu instructed
his citizens (dharma-siksa) about devotional service, working for the pleasure of the
Lord, and respecting the bráhmanas (4.21). Then the Kumáras descended and Prthu
received them in an exemplary manner, gratefuUy receiving their instructions (4.22).
Finally, Prthu and Arci went back to Godhead, applauded even by the demigods
(4.23).
King Prácinabarhi and the Pracetás
In King Prthu's lineage comes King Prácinabarhi and his ten sons, the Pracetás. Lord
Siva was pleased with their devotional inclination to Lord Vásudeva and therefore
instructed them the Rudra-gita (4.24). These prayers brilliantly unfold the Lord's
position, His heauty, the glory of bhakti and the devotees. While the Pracetás were
doing austerities, compassionate Nárada went to their father Prácinabarhi who was
involved in karma-kánda      sacrifices. Nárada enlightened him about the futility of
materialistic life by narrating the allegorical story of Puranjana (4.25-29).
This allegory describes the entanglement of the conditioned soul (Puranjana) through
matériái intelligence (Puranjani) and innumerable desires for sense gratification (her
servants) (4.25-27). The living entity is attached to his body (a city of nine gates),
family and property, but inevitable old age (Kálakanya or Jará), fear, and the fever of
death (Bhaya and Prajvára) overcome him. Finally his life airs (a five hooded serpent)
depart from the body and he obtains his next birth (Vaidarbhi) according to his
thoughts at the time of death (4.28). The episode of Vaidarbhí's lamentation and her
enlightenment by the Lord (Avijnáta) renders many important lessons on devotional
service and dedication to guru.
Later Nárada narrated a short allegory of a deer and then directly explained to
Prácinabarhi about the soul's transmigration due to the subtle mind. Thus
Prácinabarhi was inspired in devotional service and retired from materialistic life
(4.29).
The Pracetás chanted the Rudra-gita for 10,000 years and achieved the Lord's
audience, who appreciated their cooperative spirit and blessed them. The Pracetás'
prayers reveal the glories of the Lord, the process of bhakti, and the ideál aspirations
of a devotee (4.30). Then the Pracetás marry Marisa, and after ruling the world for a
long time, they hand over the kingdom to their son, Daksa, and rétire. Nárada's
instructions to the Pracetás glorify bhakti as the topmost process for self-realization
(4.31).
Conclusion
Thus the Fourth Canto is fiiled with - the glories of the Lord, H i s various devotees,
and the process of bhakti - simply to inspire one in the practice of bhakti.
Additionally there are many incidents which sérve as caution notes for the
practitioner. This volume of Bhagavata Subodhini, presents the contents of the
Fourth Canto in a simplified manner, highlighting the most crucial elements and
giving connections between various episodes, to assist the reader's understanding.
SRÍMAD-BHÁGAVATAM
CANTO 4 OVERVIEW
Contents
Fourth Canto At A Glancé                                                        25
4.1 Genealogical Table of the Daughters of Manu                                 28
4.2 Daksa Curses Lord Siva                                                      34
4.3 Talks Between Lord Siva and Satí                                            39
4.4 SatT Quits Her Body                                                         43
4.5 Frustration of the Sacrifice of Daksa                                       48
4.6 Brahmá Satisfies Lord Siva                                                  51
4.7 The Sacrifice Performed by Daksa                                            57
4.8 Dhruva Mahárája Leaves Home for the Forest                                  65
4.9 Dhruva Mahárája Returns Home                                                75
4.10 Dhruva Mahárája's Fight With the Yaksas                                    86
4.11 Sváyambhuva Manu Advises Dhruva Mahárája to Stop Fighting                  89
4.12 Dhruva Goes Back to Godhead                                                94
4.13 Description of the Descendants of Dhruva Mahárája                          100
4.14 The Story of King Vena                                                     105
4.15 King Prthu's Appearance and Coronation                                     110
4.16 Praise of King Prthu by the Professional Reciters                          114
4.17 Mahárája Prthu Becomes Angry at the Earth                                  118
4.18 Pfthu Mahárája Milks the Earth Planet                                      123
4.19 King Prthu's One Hundred Horse Sacrifices                                  126
4.20 Lord Visnu's Appearance in the Sacrificiai Aréna of Mahárája Prthu         131
4.21 Instructions hy Mahárája Prthu                                             137
4.22 Prthu Mahárája's Meeting with the Four Kumáras                             144
4.23 Mahárája Prthu's Going Back Home                                           154
4.24 Cbanting the Song Sung hy Lord Siva                                        158
4.25 The Descriptions of the Characteristics of King Puranjana                  170
4.27 Attack hy Candavega on the City of Puranjana; the Character of Kálakanya   183
4.28 Puranjana Becomes a Woman in the Next Life                                 188
4.29 Talks Between Nárada and King Prácinabarhi                                 196
4.30 The Activities of the Pracetás                                             206
4.31. Nárada Instructs the Pracetás                                             213
Fourth Canto At A Glancé
FOURTH C A N T O A T A GLANCÉ
Sváyambhuva Manu + Satarüpá
3 Daughters    |                                             2 Sons
Devahuti         Áküti                Prasuti              Uttánapáda               Priyavrata
ZZTZI                                 d T d                d z i i d i :                I
+ Kardama        + Ruci               + Daksa             + Suruci, Suniti      + BarhismatI, ...
I
3.21-33,
4.1.12-47        4.1.1-9             4.1.48-4.7             4.8.6-4.31                5.1-15
Descendants i                    Akuti + Ruci - * Yajna and Daksina
of Manu's ly
Devahuti -i- Kardama       9 daughters, 1 son (Kapila)
daughters    d T
(4.1)                            Prasuti -I- Daksa —» 16 daughters
Part A
Daksa insulted and cursed Lord Siva for not rising from his
Manu's                            seat; Nándi cursed Daksa and his followers. Bhrgu cursed
daughters                                            Siva's followers (4.2).
and
Daksa initiated a sacrifice and Satí tried to convince Siva to
Daksa's
attend, hut Lord Siva cautioned her (4.3).
sacriifice
(4.1-7)                          Yet Satí departed, and Siva's attendants accompanied her; j
Satí got a cold reception; she condemned Daksa and gave i
Lord Siva,
up her hody (4.4).                   i
Daksa and
Sati (4.2-7)
Angry Siva sent Virahhadra who destroyed Daksa's
sacrifice and heheaded him (4.5).
Brahmá appeased Lord Siva, and Siva revived Daksa's life
with a goat's head. Daksa prayed to Siva and starfed the
sacrifice. Visnu appeared and everyone offered prayers.
The Lord cautioned Daksa not to offend again. Daksa
completed the sacrifice. Satí took hirth as Párvatí and
married Siva again. (4.6-7)
Dynasty of
Adharma, a son             Adharma's family memhers represent various
of Brahmá                     unfavourable elements for bhakti.
(4.8.1-5)
Dhruva tried to get on Űttánapáda's lap and)
Part B:                                   his stepmother Suruci chastised him; Advised
hy Suniti and guided hy Nárada, Dhruva did
Adbarma's
austerities in Madhuvana to please the Lord
dynasty and                                 for attaining the highest position in the three
Dhruva                                                     worlds (4.8).
Mahárája
The Lord appeared; Dhruva offered prayers)
(4.8-12)
and the Lord offered benedictions. Dhruva |
Activities of
regretted his matériái ambitions and returned
Dhruva                    home. In time, Uttánapáda enthroned
Mahárája                          Dhruva and retired (4.9).
(4.8.6-4.12)
Hearing that Yaksas had killed his hrother
Uttama, Dhruva killed many Yaksas. Upon
Manu's advice, he stopped fighting and
pleased Kuvera (4.10-11).
Dhruva ruled the kingdom for 36,000 years,)
worshipped the Lord through sacrifices and I
finally retired and attained the Lord's abode |
in tbe same body (4.12).          j
Atiga didn't bave a son, so the demigods didn't accepP
Atiga and             his sacrificiai oblations. Ahga performed a sacrifice and
Vena,                 got a son, hut he was cruel. Failing to reform Vena,
continue                                  Ahga retired (4.13).
Dhruva's
The sages enthroned Vena, but later killed him due to bisj
dynasty
wicked nature. Sages churned Vena's thighs and       |
Part C :     (4.13-14)                            produced Bahuka (4.14)                   i
Anga,                                Sages churned Vena's arms and Prtbu atfcTArci
Vena and                             appeared. Prthu was coronated and praised hy hards
Prthu                                                  (4.15-16).
Mahárája                           When the hungry citizens approached Prthu, he chased i
(4.13-23)                          the earth. Later Prthu and others milked her to extract
various resources (4.17-18).              J
Prthu's
glorious               FrauTlnifiafeapbeB                               and ^
envious Indra stole the sacrificiai horse. When the priests
activities
thought of killing Indra, Brahmá arrived and instructed
(4.15-23)
Prthu to stop the sacrifice. Being pleased with Prthu,
Visnu appeared. Prthu forgave Indra and offered prayers
íaJjQtáNZisauilJ&m                       >
Prthu instructed the citizens and received instructions
from the Kumáras. Prthu eventually retired and ascended
to the Lord's ahode along with Arci. (4.21-23).
To save Prácinabarhi who was absorbed in
karma-kándic sacrifices, Nárada showed him
the dead sacrificiai animals awaiting to take
revenge on him. He then described an
allegory of the city of nine gates (matériái
body) in which Puranjana (embodied soul)
lived with his wife (matériái intelligence)
(4-25).                       j
Puranjana went for hunting ignoring his wife
(dharma). Being tired, he returned and
Prácinabarhi              pacified his queen (regained dharmic
and the            intelligence) and had sex life with her (4.26).
allegory of
Purafijana            Caridavega (time) and Kálakanyá (old age) X
(4.25-29)               attacked the city of Puranjana (body).
Puranjana died and due to attachment for
wife, he became princess Vaidarbhi (disciple)
in the next life and married King
Malayadhvaja (guru). After her husband's
death, Vaidarbhi met an old friend Avijnáta
(Supersoul) who instructed her (4.27-28). y
Part D :
Since Prácinabarhi couldn't grasp the
Prácinabarhi                           allegorical story, Nárada gave its spiritual
and the                                explanation and directly explained the
Pracetás                              transmigration of the soul. Prácinabarhi
(4.24-31)                                   immediately renounced (4.29).
^ Instructed by their father Prácinabarhi to X
heget children, the Pracetás went to perform
austerities. Being pleased by their plans to
worship Lord Vásudeva, Lord Siva taught
them Rudra-gita. Pracetás recited Rudra-gita
) for 10,000 years under the water (4.24).
The Lord appeared and Pracetás offered
T h e Pracetas           beautiful prayers. They came out of the
( 4 . 2 4 , 30-31)     water and angrily burned the trees, and later
married the daughter of trees, Márisa. After
begetting Daksa in her, they retired and
heard about bhakti from Nárada Muni and
1             finally attained Krsna.
Vidura expressed gratitude to Maitreya and
departed to Hastinápura.
if
1-4: Aküti + Prajápati Ruci —>• Yajna i
(Supreme Lord) and Daksiná (portion!
of Laksmi)
5: Manu brought home Yajna
1-9:
through putriká-dharma
Genealogical
line of Aküti
6-7: Yajna + Daksina      Tusitas
8-9: Six kinds of beings who preside
during Sváyambhuva Manu's reign
10-14: Devahüti -i- Kardama
9 daughters
10-47:
4.1
Genealogical            15-33: Story of Atri muni
Genealogical       line of
Table of the     Devahüti
34-47: Geneaíogy of the daughters I
Daughters of                                 of Devahüti             1
Manu
48-52: Daksa + Prasüti   16
Daughters;             |
13 daughters -i- Dharma   13 sons j
53-59: Mürti ( 1 3 * daughter of |
Daksa) -i- Dharma —> Nara-Náráyana |
Rsis; Devatás praise the rsis   j
48-66:        60-64: Geneaíogy of Sváhá (•+ Agni)
Genealogical      and Svadhá (+ pitás) (14* and 1 5 *
line of Prasüti           daughters of Paksa)
65: Sati (16* daughter of Daksa) +
Lord Siva - * No Child
66: Sati gave up her body before
attaining a mature age because her
[ father, Paksa, offended Lord Siva. j
í&^íí * A * I I &^éí ^2^a'-&'íí               '      4.1 Genealogical Table of the Daughters of Manu
L i n k Canto 3     Canto 4: In 3.21.1-5, Vidura requested Maitreya Muni to speak
about Sváyambhuva Manu's dynasty (see the overview chart in Page 24). Maitreya
first described about Manu's second daughter, Devahüti - her marriage with
Kardama Muni, their family life, followed by the activities and teachings of their only
son. Lord Kapila in 3.21-33. But the descendants of Devahüti's daughters were not
described. Now, in 4.1, Maitreya describes the lineage of Devahüti's daughters and
also that of Manu's other two daughters, Áküti and Prasüti.
1 -9: GENEALOGICAL LINE O F ÁKÜTI
1. Manu's daughters: Sváyambhuva Manu begot in his wife Satarüpá, three
daughters, namely Áküti, Devahüti and Prasüti.
2. Aküti and R u c i : Manu, in consultation with Satarüpá, handed over Áküti to
Prajápati Ruci on the condition that the son born of her be given to him as his son.
Note: Sometimes a sonless person adopts the son of his daughter as his own son, to
inherit his property. This is called putriká-dharma. Sváyambhuva Manu already had
two sons, still he kept this condition at the time of Aküti's marriage, because he knew
that the Supreme Lord will be born from his daughter Aküti.
3-4. Y a j n a and Daksiná: Prajápati Ruci, who is a brahma-varcasvt, begot in Aküti -
Yajfia, an incarnation of the Lord and Daksiná, a partial incarnation of Laksmi.
5. M a n u brought home Y a j n a gladly, and Ruci kept Daksiná with him.
Note: Manu was afraid that his son-in-law. Ruci, might be sorry for taking his son.
But Manu was glad that a daughter was also born along with the boy.
6-7. Tusitas: Later on, Yajna married Daksiná, and begot in her twelve children -
Tosa, Pratosa, Santosa, Bhadra, Sánti, Idaspati, Idhma, Kavi, Vibhu, Svahna, Sudeva
and Rocana (altogether called Tusitas).
Note: Although both Yajna and Daksiná appeared from Aküti simultaneously, they
are Lord Visnu and Laksmi, His eternal consort. They are beyond this matériái
creation and therefore, their eternal relationship cannot be changed.
8-9:   Six kinds of beings presiding during the Sváyambhuva M a n v S S S f
i     Manu (The chief progenitor)               Sváyambhuva Manu
ii     Manu-putras (Sons of Manu)                Uttánapáda and Priyavrata
Ui     Devas (Demigods)                          Tusitas
iv     Suresvara (King of the demigods, Indra)   Lord Yajna
V     Rsis (Great sages)                         Marici and others
vi     Amsávatáras (the manvantara incarnation) Lord Yajna
'mmimmmmfmmmmmm
'•t%
canto 4   O^-^^^flCl^jO^^^
Note: The six types of beings who preside in a manvantara are all manifestations of
the Supreme Lord (Ref. 12.7.15). These six beings change every manvantara. Canto 8
mentions the names of the 6 beings for all 14 manvantaras of the current day of Lord
Brahmá.
1 0 - 4 7 : GENEALOGICAL LINE O F DEVAHÜTI
10. Manu handed over Devahuti to Kardama M u n i (already mentioned in Canto 3).
11. Manu handed over Prasüti to Daksa, whose descendants spread throughout the
three worlds.
12. Now hear about the descendants of the nine daughters of Devahüti and Kardama.
Verses      Daughter                  mwmmmmmmmm. Descendants
13-14     Kalá             Marici     2 sons: Kasyapa and Pürnimá.
Pürnimá begot 2 sons - Viraja, Visvaga and a
daughter Devakulya, who became the divine Ganga
from washing the Lord's feet in another birth.
15-33     Anasüya          Atri       Dattátreya, Durvásá and Soma
[Arhsas of Visnu, Siva and Brahmá respectively)
34-35     Sraddhá          Angira     4 daughters: Siniváli, Kuhü, Ráká, Anumati.
2 sons: Utathya and Brhaspati
36-37     Havirbhü         Pulastya   2 sons: Agastya (became Dahrágni in next life),
Visravá
Visravá + Idavidá (Ist wife)   Kuvera
Visravá + Kesini (2nd wife) —> Rávana,
Kumbhakarna, Vibhisana
38      Gati             Pulaha     3 great sages: Karmasrestha, Variyán, Sahisnu
39      Kriyá            Kratu      60,000 great sages - called Válakhilyas because
they all retired from family life as vánaprasthas.
40-41     Urjá or          Vasistha   7 great sages: Citraketu, Suroci, Virajá, Mitra,
Arundhati                   Ulbana, Vasubhrdyána, Dyumán.
42      Citti or Sánti   Atharvá    Asvasirá (Dadhyanca)
43      Khyáti           Bhrgu      2 sons: Dhátá, Vidhátá; 1 daughter: Sri.
Dhátá + Áyati     Mrkanda     Márkandeya Muni;
Vidhátá + Niyati    Prána     Vedasirá   Usaná
(Sukrácárya/ Kavi)
i^^^(í''^ií''&'íí^'&^i\''&f'tV'^m                 4.1 Genealogical Table of the Daughters of Manu
16- 33: Story of Atri Muni
16. V i d u r a inquired: H o w is it that the three deities; the creator, maintainer and
destroyer of the whole creation, became the offspring of the wife of Atri Muni?
Maitreya described:
17- 18. Ordered by Brahmá to create, Atri Muni went to Rksa mountain with his
wife, Anasüya to perform severe austerities. There the river Nirvindhyá flows and its
hanks have many palása and asoka trees.
19. A t r i ' s Austerities: There Atri Muni controlled his mind and hreath (pránáyáma),
and remained standing on one leg for one hundred years, eating nothing hut air.
20. A t r i ' s thoughts: " M a y the Lord of the universe (jagadtsvara), of whom I have
taken shelter, offer me a son exactly like H i m (prajám      átma-samárh)."
21-22. Brahmá, V i s n u and Siva appear: By virtue of his pránáyáma, a hlazing fire
came out of Atri's head, hurning the three worlds. The three principal deities saw this
and went to Atri's hermitage along with Gandharvas, Siddhas, Vidyádharas and
Nágas.
Note: The Lord of the universe, the Supersoul, perceived the fire of Atri's penance,
and by His direction, Siva and Brahmá perceived it and came to Atri.
23-24. A t r i offers respects: Atri was standing on one leg, but as soon as he saw the
three deities, he eagerly approached them who were seated on a hull, swan and
Garuda, holding a drum [damaru), kusa grass and a disc respectively. Atri offered
them respects [dandavat).
25. A t r i M u n i was pleased to see that they were gracious toward him. He closed his
eyes for the time being due to their dazzling effuigence.
26. Gathering his senses, with földed palms, he offered prayers in sweet words.
27-28: Atri Muni's prayers
27. Whom did I call? - " O Brahmá, Visnu and Siva, you have divided yourself into
three bodies by accepting the gunas, as you do in every millennium for the creation,
maintenance and dissoiution. I offer respects to you. Whom among you have I called
by my prayer?"
Note: Atri called for the Lord as jagad-tsvara in 4.1.20, but he was not sure who that
jagad-isvara was, i.e. he was doubtful about the constitutional position of the
Supreme Lord. Therefore he asked whom he had called. Also, Atri's statement, "You
have accepted bodies by the matériái gunas," was made out of ignorance about
Visnu's position, since it is impossible for the Lord to have a body of matériái sattva.
Canto 4 Overview
L i n k : The three Lords remained silent. Thus Atri clarified his statement.
28.1 called for one Lord, desiring a son like H i m , but three of you have come. Please
be merciful and let me know how this happened, for I am bewildered."
29. Hearing his words, the three great deities smiled and replied as follows:
30-31: Reply of the three Lords
30. "Since you are sat-sankalpa, whatever you wished will be fulfilled. We are all the
same person upon whom you were meditating.
Note: Because their activities are Creation, Maintenance, Destruction of the universe
anyone of these three may be considered the Lord of the universe, jagad-isvara. Atri
Muni did not specifically mention whom he wanted, so all three came before him.
31. " Y o u will have sons who will represent a partial manifestation of our potency,
and will spread your reputation."
Note: In order to show that Visnu is actually the Supreme Lord among them, Visnu
became Dattátreya, an avatára, not the other two.
32. Then the three Lords disappeared.
33. Soma, Dattátreya and Durvásá appeared from Lord Brahmá, Lord Visnu and
Lord Sahkara respectively.
34-45. Refer to the table in Page 30.
46-47. Phala-sruti: The universe is populated by the descendants of the daughters of
Kardama Muni and Devahüti. Those who faithfully hear the genealogical line of
Devahüti will be relieved from all sinfui reactions.
4 8 - 6 6 : GENEALOGICAL LINE O F PRASÜTI
48-52. Daksa + Prasuti —>• 16 beautiful daughters
Verses     Prasüti's daughters              Married    Descendants
48-59      13 daughters: Sraddhá, Maitri,   Dharma     13 sons: Subha, Prasáda, Abhaya,
Dayá, Sánti, Tusti, Pusti,                  Sukha, Muda, Smaya, Yoga, Darpa,
Kriyá, Unnati, Buddhi,                      Artha, Smrti, Ksema, Prasraya and
Medhá, Titiksá, Hri, Mürti                  Sri Nara-Náráyana respectively.
48,       Sváhá                            Agni       3 sons: Pávaka, Pavamána, Suci.
60-62                                                  • Exist by eating oblations offered
to the sacrificiai fire.
• Gave birth to 45 fire-gods.
In totál 49 fire-gods (45 + 3 fathers +
1 grandfather Agni)
Í|2fíj05xt)í *S^l02^^^                           4.1 Genealogical Table of the Daughters of Manu
Verses     Prasüti's daughters    Married                    Descendants
49,       Svadhá                 Pitás (Agnisváttas,       2 daughters: Vayuná and
63-64                             Barhisadas, Saumyas,      Dhárini, expert in knowledge
Ájyapas in Pitrloka)      and realization
49,65      Sati                   Siva                       No child
Note: By the originál meaning of the names, the daughters starting with Sraddhá are
the presiding deities of various saktis of sattva-guna. Thus, these daughters had
corresponding qualities. Mürti, a form of suddha-sattva, should be understood as the
sakti who manifests the Lord.
53- 59: Appearance of Nara-Náráyana Rsis
53. J o y f u l and pleasant world: O n the appearance of Nara-Náráyana Rsis, the entire
world was joyful. Everyone's mind, the directions, the air, the rivers and the
mountains became pleasant.
54- 55. Celestial celebrations: I n the heavenly planets, Instruments sounded, fiowers
feli from the sky, the satisfied sages chanted prayers, the Gandharvas and Kinnaras
sang and the damsels danced. Devatás like Brahmá offered their respectful prayers.
56-57: Prayers of Demigods
56. Creator appeared as sage: "Obeisances unto the Lord, who created this cosmic
manifestation, which is situated in H i m as the air and clouds are situated in space,
and who has now appeared in the house of Dharma in the form of R s i . "
57. Merciful glancé: "Let that Supreme Lord, who is understood through the Vedas
{anumeya-tattvah),   and who has created peace and prosperity to destroy all
calamities, glancé upon us. His merciful glancé can deride the heauty of the spotless
lotus, the abode of Laksmi (sri-niketam)."
58. Thus being worshipped, Nara-Náráyana Rsis glanced upon the demigods and
departed for Gandhamádana H i l l .
59. These two portions of the Lord have entered Krsna and Arjuna, the best of the
Yadu and Kuru dynasties for relieving the earth of its burden.
Note: Thus Nara-Náráyana Rsis were present within Krsna and Arjuna and were
accompanying Krsria and Arjuna to remove the burden of earth. It is not that Krsna
and Arjuna were the plenary expansions of Nara-Náráyana Rsis. (Ref. Srila Jiva
Gosvámi in his Bhdgavata-sandarbha).
60-65. Refer to the table above.
66. Satí gave up her body before attaining a mature age due to her father Daksa,
offending Lord Siva.
Canto 4 Overview
mmiímmmmmiíMmm
í
4 . 2 DAKSA CURSES LORD SIVA
1-3: Vidura             Both Daksa and Siva were glorious. How could
inquires             they quarrel so bitterly that Satí gave up her life?
4-8: Daksa enters]     '      In a great sacrifice held by the leaders of the
the sacrificiai           universe, Daksa was welcomed by everyone, but
aréna                           Lord Siva remained seated.
10: Siva is shameless and proud
11-13: Posing himself as honest, this monkey-eyed,
impure rascal married my beautiful daughter.
9-19: Daksa               14-15: He is Siva (auspicious) in name only. His
insults and curses                conduct shows his inauspiciousness.
Lord Siva
16: Only by Brahmá's request, I gave him my
daughter
4 . 2 Daksa                                 17-19: "May he not receive a share in the sacrificiai
Curses Lord                                      oblations." Cursing thus, Daksa angrily left
Siva
2 1 : Daksa's supporters will be bereft of
transcendental knowledge
20-26:
Nandísvara              22: Attached householders will become attached to;
countercurses                              karma-kánda                    ;
Daksa and his
followers                     23: Let Daksa have the face of a goat
í 24-26: Curses on bráhmanas and Daksa's followers
27-32: Bhrgu                Let them become atheists, be diverted from
curses Lord Siva's          scriptural injunctions, become addicted to wine,
followers                 flesh etc. and take shelter of heretical views
33: Siva became morose and left
33-35: Siva
departs; Yajna is i
completed           134-35: The other progenitors complete a 1000 yeari
i                     sacrifice                   i
'tlf^tft^fií'^t^í^éí'^^^^^                                 4.2 Daksa Curses Lord áiva
L i n k : While describing the descendants of Sváyambhuva        Manu, Maitreya      ended with
Daksa's hatred towards Lord Siva (4.1.66). This evoked a doubt in Vidura.
1-2. H o w could Daksa neglect Satí and hate L o r d Siva? - Because:
•    Prajápati Daksa is duhitr-vatsalah       - an affectionate father
•    Lord Siva is
o     silavatáth    srestah - best among the gentle
o     cardcara-guru - spiritual master of whole world
o     nirvaira - non-envious
o     sánta-vigraha      - always peaceful
o     dtmdráma       - self-satisfied
o     jagato daivatarh mahat - greatest of the demigods
3. Bittér quarrel: Please teli me how such a son-in-law and father-in-law could
quarrel so bitterly that Sati gave up her life.
. 4 - 1 9 : DAKSA INSULTS AND CURSES L O R D SIVA
Maitreya replied:
4. Sacrifice by the leaders: Once the leaders of the universe performed a great
sacrifice in which all the great sages, philosophers, demigods and fire-gods assembled.
5. Daksa's entry: When Daksa entered there, shining like the sun, the entire assembly
was illuminated.
6-7. Daksa welcomed: Lveryone in that great assembly, except Brahmá and Siva,
stood up. After being welcomed by the leaders, Daksa offered respects to Brahmá.
8. Daksa became angry on Siva: Daksa however, became very angry to see Lord Siva
sitting and not showing him any respect. While gazing with eyes as if to burn Siva, he
began to speak harsh words.
9-18: Daksa blasphemes Lord Siva
9. I am not ignorant or envious: O brahmarsis, demigods and fire-gods, please hear
me with attention about the conduct of sddhus. I do not speak out of ignorance or
envy (ndjndndn na ca matsardt).
Note: In the commentaries of the great ácáryas, we often find positive interpretations
(indirect praise) of blasphemous words directed towards the Lord and His devotees.
Daksa's blasphemous words about Siva                Indirect praise of Siva
10    nirapatrapah    Shameless                     Maintains the shelterless
stabdha         Proud
yaso-ghna       Destroyed the fame of         By his own fame. Lord Siva derides
loka-pálás, polluted the      the fame of all others
path of gentle manners.
11    sádhuvat        Pretending to be an           Omniscient Siva understands my
honest person, he             bad behaviour (but keeps it secret)
accepted my daughter's        and so he did not stand up and
hands, and thus accepted      welcome me. He also understood
himself as my                 the qualities in my daughter, equal
subordinate.                  to SávitrI (Gáyatri).
12    markata-        This monkey-eyed person       Siva mercifuUy grants the desires of
locana          has married my fawn-          monkey-like materialists.
eyed daughter, but now        Unfortunately, I have not properly
he has failed to respect me   respected him.
even with sweet words.
13    lupta-kriydya   Doesn't perform rituals       He doesn't need to perform rituals
asucaye         Impure                        No one is cleaner than him
mánine          Proud                         He is not proud [amdnine)
bhinna-setave   Violates codes of conduct     He doesn't break rules (dbhinna-
setave)
südráyeva       Though not desiring, I        I , being unqualified, did not want to
gave my daughter to this      give my daughter, but I gave her
unqualified man (like         (like a südrd who teaches the
teaching Vedas to a           Vedas).
südrd)
14-   unmatta-vat     Like a madman,                He is mad with prema for the
15                    sometimes laughs and          Supreme Lord.
sometimes cries
citá-bhasma-    Smears crematorium            This is his pastime. According to
krta-sndnah..   ashes, ornaments with a       other Purdnas, smearing ashes on
garland of skulls and         the body is an activity of exalted
bones                         Vaisnavas.
j
4.2 Daksa Curses Lord Siva
asivah,             The most mad and             By him even a worst place (apadesa)
mattak, siva-       inauspicious creature,       becomes auspicious. No one is more
apadesah            Siva in name only            auspicious than him (asivah).
matta-jana-         Dear of crazy beings who     He mercifully accepts even the most
priyah patih.       are in tamo-guna and is      ignorant and gradually elevates
their leader                 them to spiritual consciousness.
16    nasta-éauca        Unclean                      He purifies even the impure
unmáda-nátha       Lord of the ghosts           He is merciful even to the mad
durhrde            Has impure heart             His mind is merciful even to the
sinfui
Note: In 4.2.16, Daksa, out of anger, addresses Brahmá as paramesthi (supreme
teacher in the universe) instead of as father. Thus he accuses Brahmá of being
unintelligent as his request for giving Sati to Siva lead him to suffer. (In anger, one
forgets everything).
17-18. Daksa angrily cursed Siva, " L o r d Siva, the lowest of all the demigods, should
not have a share in the sacrificiai oblations."
Note: Curse became a blessing. Being a great Vaisriava, it is not befitting for Lord
Siva to share the fruits of sacrifice along with other demigods.
19. Daksa left the assembly: In spite of the opposition of the assembly leaders,
Daksa, in great anger, cursed Lord Siva and left.
2 0 - 2 6 : NANDÍSVARA CURSES DAKSA AND H I S FOLLOWERS
20. Nándi countercursed: Infected by anger, Nandísvara countercursed Daksa and
all the bráhmanas who had tolerated Daksa's cursing Siva.
21. Be bereft of knowledge: "Anyone who has supported Daksa and neglected Lord
Siva is less intelligent. Because of this vision of duality (bodily identification), they
will be bereft of transcendental knowledge (of the Soul and the Lord).
22. Pretentious religious householder life, in which one is attached to matériái
happiness and thus attracted to the superficial explanation of the Vedas, robs one of
all intelligence and fully attaches one to karma-kánda.
grhesu kúta-dharmesu   sakto    grámya-sukhecchayá
karma-tantram vitanute       veda-váda-vipanna-dhih
23. Have a goat head: Let Daksa, who has forgottén visnu-gati            (the spiritual goal)
and is attached to sex life, very shortly have the head of a goat.
24-25. Continue in samsara: Persons, dull by materialistic education and with minds
attracted to the flowery language of Vedas, have purposely insulted Lord Siva. May
Daksa's followers continue in samsara (repeated birth and death) and always remain
attached to fruitive activities.
26. Lose discrimination: Let these bráhmanas take to education, austerity and vows
only for the purpose of maintaining the body. They shall be devoid of discrimination
in eating. Let them become beggars simply for the satisfaction of the body."
Note: Nandisvara's curses to the bráhmanas are functional in Kali-yuga.
2 7 - 3 2 : B H R G U COUNTERCURSES   L O R D SIVA'S FOLLOWERS
27-32. Bhrgu's curses: " L e t the followers of L o r d S i v a . . .
•   become atheists {pásandi).
•   be diverted from transcendental scriptural injunctions       [sat-sástra-paripanthinah
- Máyáváda philosophy).
•   become addicted to wine, flesh, etc. (imitating Lord Siva with long hair).
•   take shelter of heretical views (pásandam         ásritáh) (since they criticized
bráhmanas and Vedas that give eternal regulative principles and whose subject
matter is Lord Janárdana)."
33. Lord Siva left: When such cursing and countercursing was going on. Lord Siva
became morose and left the place.
Note: Lord Siva feared that Nandísvara might speak badly even about Janárdana and
His devotees. So to stop both Nandísvara and Bhrgu from further cursing, he left.
34. Y a j n a continued: I n spite of the absence of Lord Siva and Daksa, the other
progenitors performed a thousand year sacrifice, for sacrifice is the best way to please
Lord Hari.
35. After completing the yajna, they took their avabhrtha bath at the confluence of
Gahgá and Yamuná. Thus purified in heart, they left to their respective abodes.
llá^_3yjé>2*£^3^£^z
4.3 Talks Between Lord Siva and Satí
4 . 3 TALKS BETWEEN LORD SIVA AND SATÍ
1: Tension between Daksa and Lord Siva continued
1-4: Daksa
2: Daksa became proud of being the chief Prajápati
starts another
sacrifice
3-4: Daksa starts a sacrifice negiecting Siva, many
attended it
5-7: Knowing about the festivities, Satí approaches Siva
5-14: Satí tries
to convince
8-14: Satí says: "Many are also going, i long to see my
Siva to go to \ .
4 . 3 Talks    the sacrifice     ^
relatives, it is your father-in-iaw's event, there's no
between                            harm in going uninvited and you should be merciful to
your wife."
Lord Siva
and SatT
16, 18: One can't go uninvited if the host is disturbed,
angry and finds fault with the guest
17: Six great qualities become faults in a proud person
19: Harsh words of relatives cause great suffering
J 5-25: Lord           20: Your father doesn't appreciate your connection
Siva's reasons                              with me
not to go for
the sacrifice                2 1 : Egoistic person envies great person
22: Elevated people respect Supersoul, not the body
23:1 always offer respects to Vásudeva in pure
consciousness
24-25: Ignoring my words will lead to your misfortune
Canto 4 Overview
L i n k : To answer Vidura's question,       "Why did Sati give up her body?"           Maitreya
describes the sacrifice conducted by Daksa, to which Lord Siva was not invited.
1 - 4 : DAKSA STARTS ANOTHER       SACRIFICE
1. Tension continued between Daksa and Lord Siva in this way for a long time.
2. Daksa's pride: When Brahmá appointed Daksa the chief of all Prajápatis, Daksa
became very proud.
3-4. Daksa's sacrifices: Daksa performed a sacrifice called vdjapeya, and followed it
up with a greater sacrifice called brhaspati-sava, but neglected Lord Siva and his
followers. Many great sages, Pitás, demigods and their wives attended the sacrifice.
BT*'    5 - 1 4 : SATÍ TRIES TO C O N V I N C E R R W V A T O G Ő t o T H E SACRIFICE
5-7. Sati heard the heavenly denizens conversing about the sacrifice being held by her
father and saw the well dressed, ornamented wives of the Upadevas going there. Thus
she spoke to her husband. Lord Siva, as follows:
8-14: Sati's Arguments to Convince Lord Siva                          lr4
It is your father-in-law's sacrifice.
All the demigods are also going.
My sisters must have gone with their husbands.
I also want to decorate myself and go there with you.
10   I will be ahle to see my mother, sisters, aunts and other relatives.
I will be ahle to see the best sacrifice conducted by the great sages.
11   You know the truth that this world is a creation of the Lord's maya. As a poor
woman, not conversant with the truth, I desire to see my birth place.
12   Not only my relatives, but other ornamented women are also going with their
husbands. The festivity is visible in the sky with moving swan-like airplanes.
You are siti-kantha (blue-throated): "By drinking poison you showed kindness to
others, so please show kindness to me also."
13   How can a daughter be undisturbed hearing of a festive event at her father's house?
There's no harm in going to the house of a friend, husband, guru or father without
invitation.
14   You are known to be merciful, therefore please show kindness towards me.
You have accepted me as half of your body, please obiige me.
t2i^ií     IAJMÍV &^ÍÍ       Ö M Í Í &^ÍÍ     *AIS-         4.3 Talks Between Lord Siva and Satí     ^ ^ ^ ^ 1
1 5 - 2 5 : L O R D SIVA'S REASONS N O T TO G O F O R T H E SACRIFICE
15. Lord Siva replied smilingly, while remembering Daksa's harsh words.
16. Fault-finder host: " I t is true that one could go to a friend's house uninvited,
provided, he doesn't find fault w i t h the guest and become angry towards him."
L i n k : Sati might say, "But my father will not find faults as he has         wisdom."
17. Qualities in a proud person: "The six qualities of saintly people - knowledge,
austerity, wealth, heauty, youth and heritage - become faults in a proud person, who
loses his power of discrimination and cannot see the glories of great personalities.
vidyá-tapo-vitta-vapur-vayah-kulaih
sátánt gunaih sadbhir asattametaraih
smrtau hatáyám           bhrta-mána-durdrsah
stabdhá na pasyanti hi dháma           bhüyasám
L i n k : "But even the low-minded have affection for their        children."
18. Disturbed and angry host: "One should not go to anyone's house (even a
father's), if the person is disturbed in mind and looks at his guest with angry eyes."
L i n k : "But I will be tolerant if my father speaks somé unkindly         words."
19. Harsh words of relatives: "One suffers more due to the harsh words of relatives
than due to the sharp arrows of an enemy, for such grief continues to rend one's
heart day and night."
L i n k : "/ will go alone, you need not come."
20. Y o u r connection w i t h me: " I t is clear that you are the favourite of Daksa, yet
you will not be honoured at his house because of your connection with me."
L i n k : "You are speaking like this as you must be somewhat hostile towards              my
father."
21. Falsé ego leads to envy: "One who is conducted by falsé ego and therefore
always distressed, both mentally and sensually, cannot tolerate the opulence of self-
realized persons. Being unable to rise to their standard, he envies them."
Note: Daksa was materially püffed up and envious of Lord Siva because of his high
position as a qualitative incarnation of the Supreme Lord, and therefore honoured
and respected more. Daksa's anger at Siva's not standing up was only the final
manifestation of his envy.
L i n k : "/ believe that you do not hate Daksa. However, he is your father-in-law so you
should have risen from your seat to respect        him."
I      canto 4 Overview        ÍLÍ^IMÍMIMI^IMÍ^^^
22. Respecting Supersoul: "Unintelligent people greet each other with bodily
consciousness only. But elevated persons offer respects to the Supersoul within the
body, not to the person who identifies with the body."
Note: Because Lord Siva was absorbed in the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, even by
not glancing at Daksa upon his arrival, Daksa was respected.
L i n k : "How could you be in samadhi at that time?" - "This question cannot be
asked, since samadhi does not depend on me, but on the       Lord."
23. Vásudeva state of consciousness: "Pure consciousness (antah-karana) is called
Vásudeva, because the Lord appears there without any coverings. In that pure
consciousness I am always engaged in offering obeisances to Lord Vásudeva."
sattvarh visuddham vasudeva-sabditam
yad iyate tatra pumán apávrtah
sattve ca tasmin bhagaván vásudevo
hy adhoksajo me namasá vidhiyate
24. Don't go: Therefore you should not see your father, although he is the giver of
your body (deha-krd). Because of envy he has insulted me with cruel words, but I am
innocent.
Note: deha-krd - also implies one who cuts the body, indicating the future events.
25. Going w i l l cause harm: If you neglect my words and go, the future will not be
good for you. When a most respected person is humiliated by a relatíve, it will be
equal to death.
4.4 Sati Quits Her Body
'#:x
4 . 4 SATÍ Q U I T S HER B O D Y
11: Who would hate Siva except you?
12: You are an aty-asadhutama as you
1-5: Satíjeaves Lord         insulted an exalted personaiity
Siva
13: The Dust of Vaisnavas destroys an
'     6ÜÖ: SatT gets a                     offender                !
coid response from
Daksa             14-16: Lord Siva's name, fame, orders
and iotus feet are all giorious
11-23: SatT
4 . 4 Satí     .        condemns Daksa
17-18: Since my body was born from
Quits Her                                            a biasphemer, I wiii give it up
Body         X 24-27: Sati gives up
her body
19-20: Lord Siva is not obliged to
toiiow Vedic rules
28-30: A great cry
arises from the sky       21: Materialists cannot achieve the
powers of transcendentaiists
i'TT34X"Rbkís7drhie
away Lord Siva's             22-23: My body is a source of
attendants                       embarrassment
1 - 5 : SATÍ G O E S T O DAKSA'S SACRIFICE
1. Siva's silence and Sati's anxiety: Lord Siva became silent, understanding that Sati
would be destroyed in both cases - whether he prevented her from going or whether
she went. Sati was anxious to see her relatives, but also afraid of Siva's warning. Her
mind unsettled, she moved in and out of the room.
2. Sati's anger: Upset at being forbidden, Sati cried out of affection for her relatives,
her body shaking as she glanced at Siva in great anger as if to burn him.
3. Bewildered, Sati left: Tormented by the extrémé emotions of anger and
lamentation, her intelligence bewildered by her womanly nature, Sati left Siva, who
had given her half of his body.
4. Siva's attendants followed: Thousands of followers of Lord Siva, headed by
Manimán and Mada, followed Sati with Nándi in front, along with many Yaksas.
5. Procession: Sati was placed on the buli (Nándi), and was given her pet bird sárikd,
a ball, lotus, mirror, white umbrella, fan and garland. Accompanying was a singing
party and the whole procession was as pompous as a royal parade.
|6-10: SATI G E T S A C O L D RESPONSE F R O M D ^ ^ K S ^ ^ ^
6. Sati reached Daksa's sacrificiai aréna, which was splendid with the cbanting of
Vedic hymns, sacrificiai animals, great personalities and various paraphernalia.
7. No one received Sati properly out of fear of Daksa. Only her mother and sisters
embraced her with tears of affection and glad faces.
8. Sati did not accept the seat and gifts offered by her sisters, mother and aunts and
did not reply to their words of reception, because her father did not welcome her.
9. Sati's anger on Daksa: Sati realized that the sacrifice was devoid of any oblations
for Lord Siva and that she, being Siva's wife, was also not received by Daksa. Thus,
Sati became greatly angry and looked at Daksa as if she were going to burn him.
10. Sati condemns the sacrifice: Seeing her anger. Lord Siva's followers became
ready to kill Daksa, but Sati stopped them. Being angry and sorrowful, she started
condemning the process of fruitive sacrifices and their proud performers, like Daksa.
1 1 - 2 3 : SATÍ C O N D E M N S DAKSA
11. w h o except you, would hate Lord Siva -
(i)   who has no superior or rival in this world [atisdyanah)
(ii)   to whom no one is dear or inimical (priyas tathd apriyo)
(Ui)    who is most beloved of all (priyátmanah)
(iv)    who is the soul of all beings {tasmin samastátmani) and
(v)    is without enmity {mukta-vairake)
12. Sádhu and Asádhu: Sádhus like Lord Siva find no faults in others' qualities, but
they magnify even meager good qualities in others. But a man like you simply find
faults even in great souls [Therefore you are ati-asddhutama].
dosdn paresdm hi gunesu sddhavo
grhnanti kecin na bhavádrso dvija
gundms ca phalgún bahuli-karisnavo
mahattamds tesv avidad bhaván agham
*S1(r'Ö'^ir'fií1^^^                                                4.4 Salí Quils 11,., B„(|\
Note: Levels of Sádhu and Asádhu              WKKÍÍI^tKKKtlIKttíK^
sadhu               Accepts even faults in others, since the faults can eventually be
transformed by certain methods into good qualities.
tnahattara          Overlooks the faults, sees the good qualities.
mahattama           Takes small good qualities and magnifies them, not seeing small faults.
ati-mahattama       Sees good qualities in others where there are none.
asádhu              Thinks that someone's good qualities will turn into faults.
asddhutara          See faults only, overlooking the good qualities.
asddhutama          Takes small faults and magnifies them, seeing no good qualities at all.
ati-asddhutama      Sees only faults in others, even where there are no faults.
13. Dust of a Vaisnava: It is not surprising that the materialists who accept the body
as the self, always criticize great souls with envy and thus are diminished hy the dust
from the lotus feet of great Vaisnavas.
ndscaryam etad yad asatsu sarvadd
mahad-vinindd kunapdtma-vddisu
sersyam        mahdpürusa-pdda-pdmsubhir
nirasta-tejahsu tad eva sobhanam
L i n k : In 4.2.14-15, Daksa criticized     Lord Siva's name and conduct as actually being
inauspicious. In 4.4.14-16 Sati counters those statements.
14. (?) Lord Siva's name purifies one of all sinfui activities (ndma agham dsu hanti)
(ii) Lord Siva's order is never neglected (alanghya-sdsanam)
{Ui) Lord Siva's fame is pure            {pavitra-kirtirh)
15. Lord Siva's lotus feet are sought after by both materialists and
transcendentaiists. Y o u have offended the friend of the universe who is worshipped
both by those seeking brahmdnanda and by those desiring matériái results.
16. Auspicious Siva: In spite of having externally inauspicious habits, no one,
including Lord Brahmá, considers that Lord Siva is inauspicious. They carry the
fiowers offered to his lotus feet on their heads.
L i n k : Sati so far argued that one who vilifies a great personality is a lowly person. But
Daksa might argue that Sati was vilifying her father who was a great Prajápati.             The
answer is that Sati was defending Lord Siva, and actually she should have killed the
offender Daksa instead of just vilifying         him.
I      Canto 4 Ovorview       #'ÍífSCíi*!* IÍ^^^^^
17. H o w to treat the biasphemer of a Vaisnava: (?) Block one's ears and leave the
place if one is unable to punish him, (ii) Cut his tongue and kill him, and then give up
one's own life, as an atonement for hearing the criticism.
karnau pidhdya niraydd yad akalpa ise
dharmdvitary asrnibhir nrbhir asyamdne
chindydt prasahya rusatim asattth prabhus cej
jihvdm asün api tato visrjet sa dharmah
Note A: By killing the biasphemer, one destroys his unlimited pain in hell, so such
killing is not a sin.
Note B: A ksatriya should cut out the offender's tongue and kill him. Yaisyas and
südras (not qualified to punish) should commit suicide. Bráhmanas (not proper to
give up life) should cover their ears, remember Visnu, and go away.
L i n k : Because Daksa, who blasphemed the master of religion (Lord Siva), happened
to be the father of Sati, she decided not to kill him, but to give up her own life.
18. Therefore, I shall not maintain this body received from you, who have
blasphemed Lord Siva. The best treatment after taking poisonous food is to vomit it.
Note: Sati (the Lord's external potency) can vanquish many universes including many
Daksas. But to save her husband from the charge that "he killed Daksa through his
wife," Satí gave up her own life.
L i n k : Sati responds to Daksa's accusation (in 4.2.13) that Lord Siva does not follow
the Vedic rules, by explaining (in 4.4.19-20) that Siva is beyond the Vedic rules.
19. No obligations: Elevated transcendentaiists, like Lord Siva, are not obligated to
follow the rules of the Vedas. Therefore, it is better to follow one's own dharma and
not criticize others.
20. Pravrtti and N i v r t t i : Both pravrtti-mdrga and nivrtti-mdrga are bona fide paths.
If one wants to see these two in one person, that is contradictory. But both kinds of
activities may be neglected by a person who is transcendentally situated.
L i n k : Daksa was thinking that although his daughter was chaste and adherent to her
husband Siva, she was living in the house of a lowly beggar devoid of opulence.
21. T h e opulences we possess are unattainable (avyakta-lingdh) for people who
engage in sacrifices (dhüma-vrttibhih)     for bodily necessities. Our powers can be
achieved only by self-realized souls like the Kumáras and Nárada     (avadhüta-sevitdh).
22-23. M y body is a source of embarrassment since it comes from a person who has
offended Lord Siva. I condemn myself because of my connection with you. When
Lord Siva addresses me as Dáksáyani, I at once become morose and lose my charming
smile. Therefore I shall give up my body.
^gl^^      2 4 - 2 7 : SATÍ G I V E S U P H E R B O D Y
24. Sati's mystic yoga: Speaking thus, Sati sat down facing north. Dressed in saffron
garments, she performed ácamana and absorbed herself in the process of mystic yoga.
25. Sat-cakra-yoga: She performed sat-cakra-yoga, and raised her life air from navel
heart —>• throat  centre of her eyebrows.
26. Meditation on fire: Desiring to give up her worshipable body, due to anger
towards her father, she began meditating on the fiery air within the body.
27. Sati quits body: Meditating on the holy lotus feet of her husband, who is jagad-
guru, Sati became completely cleansed of all contaminations (her identity as daughter
of Daksa) and quit her body in a hlazing fire by meditation on the fiery elements.
2 8 - 3 0 : A G R E A T C R Y ARISES F R O M T H E SKY
28. Roar in universe: Seeing Sati's departure, there was a tumultuous roar all over
the universe. " W h y had Sati, dear to Siva, quit her body in such a manner?"
29. Daksa's neglect: " I t was astonishing that Daksa, who was Prajápati, was so
disrespectful to his chaste and honourable daughter, that she gave up her body."
30. "Hard-hearted Daksa is unworthy to be a bráhmana, and he will gain great
infamy for not stopping his daughter's death, because of hating Lord Siva."
3 1 - 3 4 : RBHUS DRIVE A W A Y L O R D SIVA'S ATTENDANTS
31. Siva's followers attacked: While people were thus talking. Lord Siva's attendants
prepared to kill Daksa.
32. Bhrgu's oblations: Seeing them swiftly approaching, Bhrgu Muni offered
oblations into the southern fire with hymns from the Yajur Veda to kill those who
destroy sacrifices.
33. Rbhus manifested: As a resuit of those oblations many thousands of powerful
demigods called Rbhus manifested, who achieved strength from Soma (Moon).
34. Siva's followers fled: Attacked by the Rbhus, the followers of Siva fled in all
directions. This was possible simply because of brahma-tejas.
mmmmwmWMmMmMfMm
S t o 4 Overview * * * ' ^ t 2 * í í « | * A " * ! * A
1-5: Lord Siva creates Virabhadra and orders him to destroy Daksa
6-13: Virabhadra and his associates reach the sacrificiai aréna and
people discuss ahout the cause of the dust storm and the power of
4 . 5 Frustration                                           Lord Siva
of the Sacrifice i
r
of Daksa                      14-18: Destruction of Daksa's sacrifice hy Siva's followers
19-26: Activities of Virabhadra - tore off Bhrgu's moustache,
plucked out Bhaga's eyes, knocked out Pusa's teeth, heheaded
Daksa
1 - 5 : L O R D SIVA CREATES VIRABHADRA
1. Siva hears the news: Hearing from Nárada Muni about Sati's death and how his
soldiers had been driven away by the Rbhus, Lord Siva became greatly angry.
2-3. Appearance of Virabhadra: In great anger Siva plucked a hair and threw it on
the ground. Ltom that hair, a fearfui black démon (Virabhadra) appeared. He was as
high as the sky and as bright as three suns, with hair like hlazing fire, fearsome teeth,
a garland of skulls and thousands of arms, equipped with weapons.
4. Siva orders Virabhadra: When Virabhadra asked with földed hands, "What shall
I do?". Lord Siva ordered him to kill Daksa and his soldiers at the sacrifice.
5. Virabhadra's prowess: Thus ordered, Virabhadra circumambulated Lord Siva. He
considered himself capable of coping with any power offered against him.
C/íTfrSiMÍí'SlTir'S^                   'iSlSt      4.5 Frustration of the Sacrifice of Daksa
6. Virabhadra proceeds: Accompanied by the associates of Siva, carrying a fearfui
trident, Virabhadra proceeded towards the sacrifice, making a thundering sound with
his foot ornaments.
7. Dust storm: A great dust storm was created by them, causing darkness. Everyone
assembled in the sacrificiai aréna wondered where the dust was coming from.
8. T h e y said: Where is this dust coming from? This cannot be because of wind or
cows passing, or plunderers (because the powerful King Prácinabarhi would punish
the plunderers). Is the dissoiution of the planet about to occur?
9. Prasüti and the women said: "This danger is the resuit of Daksa's sin. He insulted
innocent Sati and caused her death, while her sisters watched."
L i n k : Prasüti   could understand    that this danger was       also because of          Daksa's
negiecting the prestige and honour of Lord Siva. Therefore she describes the power of
Siva.
10. " L o r d Siva dances at the time of dissoiution with scattered hair, piercing the
rulers of the directions with his trident, waving his flag-like arms holding weapons,
laughing and roaring like thunder."
11. Angering Siva! - " H o w can anyone, even Brahmá, have good fortune after
angering Lord Siva, who - (?) is terrifying in appearance, (ii) has intolerable strength,
and (iii) scatters the planets by the movements of his brows."
12. E v i l omens: While people were speaking like this, Daksa saw dangerous omens
from all sides, from the earth and the sky.
13. Disturbances by Virabhadra: Virabhadra, along with Lord Siva's associates,
holding various weapons, ran all around the sacrificiai aréna and thus began to create
disturbances.
1 4 - 1 8 : DESTRUCTION O F T H E SACRIFICE
14    They destroyed pillars, women's quarters, the assembly hall, the
kitchen, residential quarters and sacrificiai pots.
15    They extinguished the sacrificiai fire, tore down the boundary line of
the sacrificiai aréna and urinated there.
16    They blocked the way of the fleeing sages, threatened the women and
arrested the demigods.
17   Maniman arrested Bhrgu Muni, and Virabhadra arrested Daksa.
Candesa arrested Püsá and Nandísvara arrested Bhaga.
18   Stones were continuously pelting; All the priests and others were
greatly aggrieved and started dispersing in fear for their lives.
1 9 - 2 6 : ACTIVITIES O F VÍRABHADRA
19. T o r e off the moustache of Bhrgu, who had smiled, showing his moustache
(after Daksa insulted Siva).
20. Plucked out the eyes of Bhaga, who had encouraged Daksa by the movement of
his eyebrows in the assembly.
21. Knocked out the teeth of Püsá, who by smiiing sympatheticaiiy had shown his
teeth (just as Lord Baiadeva knocked out the teeth of Dantavakra).
22-23. T r i e d to behead Daksa with sharp weapons, by sitting on his chest, but was
unsuccessful. He then tried to do it with hymns as well as weapons, but still it was
hard to cut. Thus Virabhadra was exceedingly bewildered.
24. C u t off Daksa's head with a wooden device meant for killing sacrificiai animals.
Thus Daksa became a sacrificiai animál.
25. Siva's followers joyful: Seeing this, the followers of Lord Siva expressed great
joy, while others expressed grief.
26. Virabhadra left: Virabhadra, in great anger, then offered Daksa's head in the
sacrificiai fire as an oblation. After setting fire to the whole aréna, he departed for
Kailása.
4.6 Brahmá Satisfies Lord Siva
r     4 . 6 BRAHMA SATISFIES LORD SIVA
1-3: The demigods inform Brahma about the
mishap
I 4-7: Brahmá said, "You cannot be happy after
1-8: Demigods
offending a great personality. Pacify Lord Siva by
approach Lord
failing at his feet and beg his pardon. No one
Brahmá for help
knows his glories."
8: Brahmá takes the demigods to Lord Siva's
abode (Kailása).
|9-22: Description[_     Beautiful with varieties of birds, plants, herbs, |
of Kailása hill                   animals and demigods.                 \
23-31:
Saugandhika forest, Nanda and Alakananda rivers!
Description of
and the demigods' enjoyment there.
Alaká region
4 . 6 Brahmá
32: Description of the Banyán tree
Satisfies
Lord Siva        32-41: Darsana         33-38: Siva was sitting gravely under the Banyán
of Lord Siva as             tree, in virasana showing tarka mudrá,
seen by the            surrounded by Kumáras, Kuvera and Nárada
demigods                    with an audience of great sages
39-41: Seeing Brahmá, Lord Siva offered respects!
42-45: You create this universe, the systems of j
sacrifice and varnás'rama. You ordain various
destinations.
42-53: Brahmá
glorifies Lord          46-49: Sádhus are compassionate, so please
Siva and             spare sinfui Daksa who is influenced by máyá
petitions him
50-53: Please accept your sacrificiai share and
revive Daksa, Bhaga, Bhrgu, Püsá and the
demigods
L i n k : After the sacrifice was destroyed by Virabhadra, all those who had been injured
and fled, approached Lord Brahmá for help.
1 - 8 : DEMIGODS APPROACH LORD       BRAHMÁ^HI
1-2. A l l the devatás, priests and guests, wounded and defeated by Lord Siva's
followers, approached Brahmá and informed him of what had happened.
3. Brahmá and Visnu, knowing that this would happen, did not go to the sacrifice.
4-7: Lord Brahmá spoke to the demigods -
4. No happiness by offending: You cannot be happy in executing a sacrifice if you
offend a great personality {tejiyasi krtágasi). [Though you desire to live happily, it is
better that you do not live!]
5. Please Lord Siva: You have excluded Lord Siva from his share of the sacrifice,
therefore you are all offenders. [If you desire to live,] you should please him with
pure hearts and fali down at his lotus feet, since he is pleased easily (Ásutosa).
6. Reasons for his anger: When Lord Siva is angry [yasmin kupite) the world and its
protectors cannot exist. He was especially sorry because of losing his wife and the
harsh words spoken by Daksa. Therefore you should at once go and beg his pardon.
L i n k : The demigods said, "Please give us somé way to do this. We are          surrendered
unto you."
7. Siva's prowess: I , Indra, you, the sages, or any embodied being, do not know how
powerful Lord Siva is; he is completely independent. Then who would dare to offend
him?
8. Brahmá and demigods left for Kailása: After thus instructing the devatás, the
Pitás and the prajesas (the lords of the living entities), Brahmá, along with all of
them, left for Kailása, the abode of Lord Siva.
9-22:   DESCRIPTION O F KAILÁSA HILL
Kailása hllí is fiiled with...
9    Ausadhis (herbs); Vedic hymns and mystic yoga practice; demigods, Kinnaras,
Kimpurusas, Gandharvas, Apsarás.
10   Valuable jewels and minerals; varieties of trees and plants; various types of deer.
11   Waterfalls; beautiful caves inhabited by beautiful wives of the mystics.              ,
4.6 Brahma Sati«fies I ord Siva
12    Peacocks' sweet vibrations; bees' humming; singing of cuckoos and other birds.
13    Tall trees with straight branches that appear to call the sweet birds;
Elephants passing through, seeming to shake the mountain; resounding waterfalls
14-   Flower-bearing trees - mandára, pdrijáta, sarala, tantála, tála, kovidára, ásana,
16    arjuna, ámra-játi (mangó), kádamba, dhüli-kadamba, nága, punnága, campaka,
pátala, asoka, bakula, kunda and kurabaka, the golden lotus flower, the
cinnamon tree, málati, kubja, malliká and mádhavi.
17-   Fruit-bearing trees - kata, jackfruit, julara, banyán trees, plaksas, nyagrodhas,
18    trees producing asafoetida, betel nuts, bhürja-patra, rájapüga, mangó, priyála,
madhuka, inguda, thin bamboos, ktcaka and similar other trees.
19-   Flowers - kumuda, utpala and satapatra
20    Lakes full of various kinds of birds who whisper very sweetly
Animals like deer, monkeys, boars, lions, rksas, salyakas, forest cows, forest
asses, tigers, small deer, buffalo and many other animals;
21    Varieties of deer - karnántra, ekapada, asvásya, vrka and kastüri; many banana
trees.
22. Kailása H i l l is surrounded by the Alakanandá (Gahgá), which is made more
auspicious by the hathing of Sati. A l l the demigods, after seeing the specific heauty of
Kailása H i l l , were struck with wonder of its great opulence.
2 3 - 3 1 : DESCRIPTION O F ALAKÁ R E G I O N
23. Thus the demigods saw the most beautiful A l a k a region (uncommonly beautiful)
and the Saugandhika forest (fiiled with the fragrance of Saugandhika Iotuses).
24. Outside the city were the rivers Nandá and Alakanandá, sanctified by the dust
of the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord (tirthapáda).
Note: Whenever water or anything touches the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord or
anyone who is devoted to the Lord, it is purified and spiritualized, free from any
matériái contamination.
25. The wives of the devatás, fatigued after sexual enjoyment {rati-karsitáh),          come
down and enter those rivers and enjoy sprinkling their husbands with water.
26. Thus the water becomes yellow and fragrant being mixed with the kunkuma
from the bodies of damsels. Llephants drink this water though they are not thirsty.
27. Alaká was fiiled with many beautiful airplanes bedecked with pearls, gold and
jewels, occupied by the wives of the Yaksas.
28-29. The demigods passed through the region of Kuvera (the king of the Yaksas)
and the Saugandhika forest, fiiled with fiowers, fruits and desire trees, humming
• hees, warhling flocks of cuckoos and lakes fiiled with swans and Iotuses.
30. There, the fragrance produced by the elephants' rubbing against the sandalwood
trees, agitate the minds of the damsels for further sexual enjoyment.
Note: The nice atmosphere in the matériái world, immediately awakens the sexual
appetite in the minds of materialistic persons. In complete contrast, everyone in the
spiritual world engages in glorifying the Lord, despite a much better atmosphere and
more beautiful women (Ref. SB 3.15.17, 20).
31. They also saw the hathing ghátas with steps made of vaidürya-mani           and water
fiiled with Iotuses. Then they saw the great banyán tree of Lord Siva.
Illl^^             :   p ^ J ^ " " " " ! ™ " " ^ * ^
32. T h e Banyán tree was 100 yojanas high with hranches extending for 75 yojanas.
Its shade permanently cooled the temperature, yet there was no nőise of hirds.
33. L o r d Siva was sitting under that Banyán tree, which can give perfection to
mystic yogis. As grave as eternal time, Siva seemed to have given up his anger.
34. Siva was sitting there surrounded hy saintly persons like Kuvera and the four
Kumáras. He was grave and saintly (samsdnta-vigraham).
Note: Lord Siva's association with the Kumáras and Kuvera indicates that he has all
transcendental and matériái opulences.
35. Lord Siva was situated i n perfection of vidyd, tapa and yoga (devotional service),
as the master of the senses (adhisvaram), and the friend of the universe (visva-
suhrdam). He was performing austerities to benefit the world, out of his affection for
all jivas (vdtsalydl loka-mangalam).
36. He was performing austerities, with deerskin, matted hair and a staff. H i s
reddish body was smeared with ashes (like an evening cloud) and on his hair was the
symbol of the crescent moon.
37. He was seated on a kusa mat among listening sages, and was speaking to the
great sage Nárada about the Absolute Truth (about bhakti).
38. Virásana: His left leg was on his right thigh, and his left hand was on his left
thigh. In his right hand he held rudráksa heads and showed the tarka-mudrá.
Note: Lord Siva is called yogisvara and Lord Krsna is called yogesvara. Yogisvara
indicates that no one can surpass the yoga practice of Lord Siva and yogesvara
indicates that no one can surpass the yogic perfection of Lord Krsna.
39. The demigods and sages offered respects to L o r d Siva, the chief of all thinkers,
who was absorbed in brahmdnanda (trance of meditation on adhoksaja).
Note: Lord Siva is manünám adyam, the chief of all thinkers, since he is always
thoughtful regarding how to deliver everyone from their conditional life. Thus he
appears as Advaita Acárya who appealed to Lord Caitanya for the deliverance of the
fallen, conditioned souls.
40. I n spite of his exalted position, worshipable Siva stood up seeing Brahmá arrive
with the devatás, and offered him respect by bowing down.
41. Brahmá spoke: A l l the sages who were sitting there also offered their respects to
Brahmá. After being so worshipped, Brahmá, smiiing, began to speak to Lord Siva.
Note: Lord Brahmá was smiiing to conceal his fear as he was afraid that Lord Siva
might be in an angry mood.
L i n k : Although Brahma received respects from Siva, he knew that Siva was more
exalted than himself. Now Brahma glorifies Siva in the mood of Saivites.
4 2 - 5 3 : BRAHMÁ GLORIFIES L O R D SIVA AND PETITIONS H I M          Jfjj^
42-43. Creation: I know that you are - (?) the Supreme Brahman beyond the matériái
manifestation, {ii) the controller of the universe, {iii) the form of Sadásiva, the father
and mother of the universe {prakrti and purusa or Sakti and Siva) who create,
maintain and destroy the universe just as a spider acts upon its web.
Note: Sometimes, Lord Siva is praised on the levél of Lord Visnu, because he is an
incarnation of the Lord. Lord Siva acts on behalf of Lord Visnu. Lord Visnu is
unattached to matériái activities and is untouched by the external energy. But when
He comes in touch with the external energy (when matériái activities have to be
performed). He appears in His feature as Lord Siva. [Ref. Srila Prabhupáda's purports
of SB 8.7]. Lord Siva and Lord Visnu are not different in the sense that the milk in
yogurt and the originál milk are not different.
44. Systems: Y o u have created - (?) the system of sacrifices, through the agency of
Daksa for deriving the benefits of dharma and artha, {ii) the system of varnásrama,
which the bráhmanas follow with determination.
Note: Here Brahmá indicated that since Daksa, the person who initiates dharma, is
dead, dharma will be destroyed, causing misfortune for the world.
45. Destinations: Y o u ordain the destinations of
(i) Svarga or liberation (Vaikuntha or impersonal Brahman) for pious people
(ii) Hell for impious people.
^^m^B                             W9§'^£y~!''d7^^-^3y*3^zy**'^33.y*^-'t^Z
But why do you do the opposite to somé people?
Note: "Why should pious Daksa die like this and impious Ajámila get liberation?"
L i n k : In 4.6.45, Brahma seemed to blame Lord Siva, but now he clarifies that Siva's
punishing Daksa is not due to his anger, but his mercy (by kaimütika     nyáya).
46-49: Please spare sinfui Daksa who is influenced by máyá
46. Surrendered devotees do not become angry with other beings, because they
observe your presence as Paramatma in everyone, and thus do not differentiate
among living beings. Only the animals become angry.
Note A: Even the devotees do not become angry, how could you become angry?
Note B: There is no difference between the Lord's anger on the demons and His
blessings on the devotees, because both are blessings on a spiritual levél.
L i n k : Siva might say, "But if I do not become angry and suitably punish,          then
everyone would become sinfui as they would not get results for their sins."
47. Y o u , who are exalted, need not k i l l sinfui people as they are already killed by
providence because of their (?) differentiated vision, (??') attachment to karma, {iii)
mean-mindedness, {iv) envy at others' prosperity and {v) causing distress to others by
their piercing words.
48. Sádhus are compassionate to the materialists who, being bewildered by visnu-
mdyá, sometimes offend the devotees. Sádhus do not show their prowess on such
offenders because karma will act upon them.
yasmin yadá      puskara-nábha-máyayá
durantayá sprsta-dhiyah prthag-drsah
kurvanti tatra hy anukampayá     krpáth
na sádhavo daiva-balát krte kramam
49. Y o u are never bewildered by the Lord's máyá, therefore you should be merciful
toward those who are bewildered by that máyá and are attached to karma.
5 0 - 5 3 . Brahmá puts forth his requests
50. Y o u destroyed everything because the priests did not offer you a share in the
sacrifice although you hold a share and you give its resuit.
51. Let Daksa get back his life, Bhaga his eyes, Bhrgu his moustache, Püsá his teeth.
52. Revive the demigods: May the injured demigods recover by your grace.
53. T a k e your share: O destroyer of the sacrifice {yajha-han), please take your share
of the sacrifice and let the sacrifice be completed by your grace.
4.7 The Sacrifice Performed by Daksa
yf                    Av
4 . 7 T H E SACRIFICE PERFORMED BY DAKSA
1-2: Lord Siva smilingly spoke that his punishment be only
tor correction.
3-5: Lord Siva tultils the request ot Lord Brahmá partially j
1-12: Lord Siva        6-8: Appreciating the wordsqt Lord Siva, sages go to the
revives Daksa's         sacrificiai aréna along with Siva and Brahmá and jóin the
life                              goat head to Daksa's body
9-11: Freed ot contamination, Daksa desires to otter
prayers to Siva. But out ot grief ot his daughter's death,
13-15: Daksa's                                he couldn't
prayer unto
Lord Siva            12: Pacitying his mind, Daksa praises Lord Siva sincerely
116-17: FHe begins the sacrifice and the purodás'a ohlations|
16-25: Daksa      i                        are ottered                        i
starts the
18-19: Lord Hari appears when Daksa otters clarified
4.7 The      sacrifice and                     hutter with Yajur Veda mantras
Sacrifice     Lord Visnu
arrives                     20-21: Description ot the Lord's torm
Performed
by Daksa      26-47: The            22-25: The demigods otter respect and prayers as per
their capacity hy the Lord's mercy.
demigods offer
Prayers to Lord;
Visnu
48-54: The               48-49: The Lord is pleased and addresses Daksa
Lord instructs    j     50-54: "Only ignorant persons see the demigods as
Daksa          I      independent or separate trom the Supreme Lord."
55-57: Daksa worships the Lord, then Siva and other
demigods
55-61: Daksa
completes the                 58-60: Maitreya explains Sati's future hirth
sacrifice
6 1 : Phala-s'ruti
1 - 1 2 : L O R D SIVA REVIVES DAKSA'S LIFE
1. Thus being pacified by Lord Brahma, L o r d Siva smilingly spoke as follows:
2. Punishment is for correction: " 1 do not mind the offences of the demigods, as
they are childish and less intelligent. I have punished them only to correct them."
Note: There are two types of punishment - (?) that which a conqueror imposes upon
an enemy and (?'?') that which a father imposes on his son. Here, Lord Siva is not
acting inimically, but as a father.
3-5. Lord Siva fulfils the requests of L o r d Brahmá partially
Let...                                     Since...
Daksa have a goat's head                         he had the words and intelligence
of a goat
Bhaga see his portion of the sacrifice with      his eyes were contaminated with
Mitra's eyes                                     fault, devoid of spiritual vision
Pusá chew through the teeth of his disciples     he has shown his teeth at the
or Daksa, or eat chickpea dough if he is alone   devotees and laughed at them
the demigods who agreed to give me my            they did not side with Daksa
share have their limbs restored                  when Daksa criticized me
the priests and others work with the arms of     they favoured Daksa, raising their
the Asvini-kumáras and the hands of Püsá         arms and shouting
Bhrgu have the moustache of a goat               he was the chief advisor of Daksa
6. Everyone approved: A l l the assembled people heard the words of Lord Siva, the
best among the benedictors (midhustatna) and approved by saying, "Sádhu Sádhu."
7. Everyone went to sacrificiai aréna: Then the demigods and the sages, headed by
Bhrgu, invited Siva and went with him and Brahmá back to the sacrificiai aréna.
8. Daksa got a goat head: After everything was executed exactly as directed by Lord
Siva, Daksa's body was joined to the head of the sacrificiai animál (a goat).
9-10. Daksa saw Siva: Then, Daksa suddenly awoke as if from sleep, and saw Lord
Siva in front of him. Daksa's heart, which had been contaminated by hatred for Lord
Siva, was immediately cleansed like a laké cleansed by autumn rains.
11-12. Daksa remembered Sati: Daksa wanted to offer prayers to Lord Siva, but as
he remembered the ill-fated death of his daughter, his eyes fiiled with tears and he
could not speak. Pacifying his mind with great endeavour, he came to his senses and
began to praise Lord Siva sincerely.
•tA*                            'tAiliCi^-           4.. Ilu-Sacrilicc l'ciiormfd l)\ Dak^.i
1 3 - 1 5 : DAKSA'S PRAYERS U N T O L O R D SIVA
13. B y punishing me, you showed your mercy on me, although I am an offender.
You and Visnu never neglect even brahma-bandhus. Why, then, should you neglect
me, who is engaged in performing sacrifices?
14. Y o u always protect the bráhmanas in their pursuits of vidyá, tapa, vrata and
self-realization, like a cowherd protects his cows with a stick. Y o u were created by
Lord Brahmá for this purpose.
15. Not knowing the truth about you I insulted you with harsh words, yet you took
no notice. Instead, you compassionately saved me from hell by punishing me. Please
be satisfied by your o w n mercy, for I cannot satisfy you with my words.
1 6 - 2 5 : DAKSA STARTS THE SACRIFICE AND L O R D V I S N U ARRIVES
16. Daksa begins the sacrifice again: Being pardoned by Lord Siva and with the
permission of Brahmá, Daksa again began the sacrifice.
17. Purodása oblations: T o resume the sacrifice, the bráhmanas offered purodása
oblations to purify the sacrificiai aréna of the contamination caused by Virabhadra.
18-19. L o r d H a r i appeared: As soon as King Daksa offered the clarified butter
(havisá) with Yajur Veda mantras. Lord H a r i appeared on Garuda, illuminating the
directions and diminishing the luster of the demigods by His own effuigence.
20-21: Description of the Lord's Form
sydmah                            _   Blackish in complexion                     _ __
hiranya-rasanah                       Golden yellow garments
arka-kirita-justah                    Crown as dazzling as the sun
nila-alaka bhramara                   Hair bluish like black bees
mandita-kundala-dsyah                 Face decorated with earrings
sankhábja-cakra-sara-cápa-gaddsi-     8 hands (like 8 petals of a lotus) holding conch,
carma-                                wheel, club, lotus, arrow, bow, shield and
vyagrair hiranmaya-bhujair            sword, and they were decorated with golden
ornaments (like the sunrise).
iva karnikdrah             __         Body appeared like a blue lotus flower
vaksasy adhisrita-vadhür vana-mdly    Chest decorated with the goddess of fortune
and a garland
uddra-hdsdvaloka-kalayd ramayarhs ca Face decorated with a beautiful glancé and
visvam                                smiiing attitűdé that can captivate the entire
world, especially the devotees
I         canto 4 Overview ' " " ^   §'11^1* M * ^^^^^^
IP                                                3*^3,^w^.33yv-^3y**'^33yi3'^t^'y**^
pdrsva-bhramad-vyajana-cdmara-rdja-           vyajana-cdmara on both sides (like swans)        |
hamsak
svetdtapatra-sasinopari rajyamdnah            White canopy overhead (like the moon)             |
22. Demigods offer respects: As soon as Lord Visnu was visible, all the demigods led
by Lord Brahmá, Indra and Lord Siva immediately offered respects.
23. Prayers: Lveryone's luster faded in the presence of the Lord's effuigence. Fearfui
with awe and veneration and folding their hands, they offered prayers.
24. Ability to pray is by Lord's mercy: Although the Lord's unlimited glories are
beyond the mentái activities (arvák-vrttayah)                of the demigods, they could see H i s
form and offer prayers according to their different capacities only by H i s mercy
[krta-anugraha).
apy arvág-vrttayo yasya mahi tv   átmabhuv-ádayah
yathd-mati grnanti sma  krtdnugraha-vigraham
Note: One can offer prayers or service to the Lord according to one's capacity. This
capacity is increased by the devotee's service spirit. As the service increases, the Lord
reveals Himself more and more to the devotee.
25. Daksa began offering prayers unto the Lord, who is -(?') the master of sacrifice
iyajnesvara), (ii) the supreme guru (páram guru), (iii) the master of sacrifice and (iv)
surrounded by associates like Sunanda and Nanda.
2 6 - 4 7 : D E M I G O D S O F F E R PRAYERS T O L O R D V I S N U
Note: Many of the following prayers offered by the various participants of Daksa's
sacrifice consist of - (i) praise of the Lord without sufficient understanding of His
glories, and also (ii) somé indirect criticism or blame of others. However, ácáryas
present the real meaning of these prayers by positiveiy interpreting them wherever
necessary. Those real meanings are presented in the following table along with the
indirect criticism intended by the personality who is offering the prayer.
Prayer by                            Prayer                            Comments/ Criticism
26    Daksa             You are: (i) pure (suddham), (ii) situated           You alone are the
in Your spiritual abode (sva-dhdmny),                Lord and take the
(iii) transcendental to all speculative              covering of
positions, (iv) completely spiritual (cin-           knowledge. Others,
mdtram), (v) one without a second                    taking coverings of
(ekam), (vi) fearless (abhayam), (vii)               ignorance, like Siva,
controller of máyá, (viii) unaffected by             though playing humán
tit *Z?' 11   *éél'
4.7 The Sacrifice Performed by Daksa
maya though situated in her as                   roles, do not know
purusdvatára, [ix) self-sufficient (dtma-        how to act.
tantrah)
27     Priests      Because of Nandi's curse, we are                 How can Daksa
[rtvija]     absorbed in karma and do not know the            know You? (They
truth about You. We are executing                glancé at Daksa.
yajnas mentioned in tri-vedas. Through           "What do you
these yajnas, the demigods get their             know?")
shares.
28     Assembly     When will a person moving in this                Daksa and the priests
members      troublesome path of samsara [utpatti             are criticized: " I f
{sadasyá)    adhvani) full of - fear of wild animals,         Daksa does not
forest fires of lamentation, mirage of           surrender to You,
matériái happiness, fearfui snake of time,       then what can You
afflicted by lust take shelter of Your           do? He is thirsty for
lotus feet?                                      matériái sense objects
(mrga-trsi)."
29     Lord Siva    My mind is fixed on Your lotus feet,             My mind was fixed in
which, as the source of all benedictions         Your feet. Those who
[dsisehdkhildrthe), are worshipped even          do not have
by liberated great sages as they are             knowledge (like
worthy of worship (arhaniye). I do not           Daksa), say that I
consider the criticism of the ignorant,          have broken the rules
by Your mercy.                                   of good conduct.
30     Bhrgu        Please forgive us for our behaviour as           Even now Brahmá, _
even people like Brahmá, Siva and myself         Siva do not know the
are covered by ignorance and cannot              truth about You.
understand the truth about You.                  Ignorantly, they say,
"Iknow."
I 31    Brahma       Your transcendental svarüpa cannot be            How can people like
understood by anyone through the                 Bhrgu, who have
different matériái processes of acquiring        taken shelter of
knowledge.                                       matériái senses, see
Your form.
32     Indra        Your eight handed form is - (?) for the          "By Your
welfare of universe (visva-bhdvanam),            indescribable mercy,
(ii) pleasing to the mind and eyes               we are able to see
(dnanda-karam mano-drsdm), (iii)                 Your form." This
"3«.                            'J3^i
**éf    m.ti.       ¥6                     Mti.
Cinto 4 0\cr\i('\.                                                                       7i#;
prepared to punish demons who are            statement is directed
envious of devotees {sura-vidvit             to Brahmá.
ksapanaih).
33     Wives of        Please revive the sacrifice that has been    "Without Lord's
performers      destroyed by Lord Siva who is angry at       presence, nothing can
of sacrifice    Daksa.                                       be accomplished even
with all efforts." This
is addressed to
everyone.
34     Sages           Your activities are astounding - (?) You     " A l l other performers
perform actions by Your potencies, but       of action are attached
You are not contaminated by them,            to the results." This
{ii) You are not even attached to Laksmi     comment is directed
for wealth.                                  to Brahmá and
others.
35     Siddhas         Our minds mérged in the nectarean            "Let us submerge in
river of Your transcendental pastimes        the Lord's pastimes
{tvat-kathd-mrsta-piyüsa-nadydm),    and     without considering
desires never to leave such                  our duties." This
transcendental bliss (like having attained   statement is directed
oneness with Brahman).                       to the sages.
36     Prasüti         O Srinivdsa, be pleased with us! Without     "Without You, the
Your presence, the sacrifice is not          sacrifice is not
auspicious (like a headless body [sirsa-     complete." This
htnah]), though endowed with                 statement is directed
everything.                                  to all devatás and
Brahmá
37    Lokapalas       We believe only in direct sense              "Those who think
perception and see You as a creation of      Your form is matériái,
the matériái world, although You are         do not see Y o u . " This
beyond the five elements.                    is directed to dry
jnánís, sages, devatás.
38-   Yogesvaras      38. Though the jndnis are very dear to       You are most
39    (great          You, You are bhakta-vatsala. Therefore,      affectionate to the
mystics)        please bestow bhakti.                        devotee. It is never
39. Our obeisances unto You who has          said that You are
created varieties of manifestation under     affectionate to the
three modes, though transcendental.          jiiánis.
ir#-wá*A>s*íí^^^^^
J3^i                                                4.7 The Sacrifice Performed by Daksa
40    Vedas         Though You are the shelter of mode of         "Vedas do not know.
personified   goodness, You are nirguna, and cannot         What to speak of
be known even by the Vedas.                   others then?" This is
directed to the
followers of karma
and jnána.
41    Agni          Respects unto You who is sacrifice            " I just carry the
(Fire-god)    personified, and by whose power I ,           offering, but I do not
bright with fuel, carry the sacrificiai       know the truth about
oblations (which are Your energies).          Y o u . " This is directed
to the sacrificers who
think they have
knowledge.
42    Devatás       You are the protector, maintainer and         "You are known by
(Demigods)    destroyer of this universe. Please protect    Your servants and not
us, Your servants, who see You.               by others." This is
directed to the
sacrificers and
jnánis.
43    Gandharvas    While entering assembly, we praised           "They think they are
Daksa as the Supreme Lord but actually        the Lords but they are
we praise You alone, since all others are     not." This is directed
portions of Your portions (athsámsás).        to Brahmá and
We offer respects to You.                     others.
44    Vidyadharas   A materially absorbed person can reject       "Hlusions can be
illusion by hearing krsna-kathá.              rejected by serving the
nectar of Your
topics." This is
directed to dry jnánis.
45-   Bráhmanas     45-46. We offer respects to You who are       The obstacles to the
47                  sacrifice personified as Varáhadeva,          sacrifice were the
and are praised by the great sages.           followers of Siva.
47. If cbanting Your name destroys            This statement is
obstacles, then how much more will            directed towards
Your very presence destroy obstacles.         them.
I      Canto 4 Overview         # " | f f 2 í ' A ' * A * A ^ Ő * A^^^^
W                             ' '?(7r*.7?í!.?7-**;ZM
4 8 - 5 4 : T H E L O R D INSTRUCTS D A K S A ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ | J J | | J |
48. Daksa begins the yajna, his consciousness now purified.
49. T h e Lord's pleasure: Lord Visnu is enjoyer of the results of all sacrifices (sarva-
bhdga-bhuk), yet He was satisfied simply with His share {svena bhágena).
50-54: Lord Visnu Instructs Daksa
50. Non-difference: I am the Supersoul, the self-sufficient witness. But impersonally
there is no difference (avisesanah) between Brahmá, Lord Siva and Me. [So, never
commit such offenses again.]
L i n k : "But the Supreme Lord is only one. According     to the scriptures that is You."
51. Different names: I am the originál Person, but for creation, maintenance and
destruction I act through M y máyá and take on different names.
L i n k : "But how is Brahmá who is a jtva, and Siva who is touched by the gunas even
though being isvara, nondifferent from You?"
52. Ignorant see differences: Only the ignorant person sees a difference between Me
and the jivas, or between Brahmá, Siva and Me (explained by kaimütika-nyáya).   But I
am the non-dual Supreme Brahman.
Note: The jivas are nondifferent from Me because they are my tatasthá-sakti. Sakti is
nondifferent from saktimán. Brahmá and áiva are nondifferent from Me because they
are gunávatáras.
53. M y devotees never see differences between Me and all the jivas,                  just as a
common man does not see any difference between himself and his limbs.
54. Resuit of seeing non-difference between the three of us achieves peace.
5 5 - 6 1 : DAKSA COMPLETES THE SACRIFICE
55. Daksa worships V i s n u : Thus being instructed, Daksa first worshipped Visnu,
then separately worshipped Lord Brahmá and Lord Siva.
56. Daksa worshipped Siva and others: He worshipped Siva with his share. After
worshipping other demigods by concluding rites, he bathed along with the priests.
57. Demigods departed to their abodes after giving blessings to Daksa.
58. Sati was reborn as Párvatí in the womb of Menaká, wife of Himálaya.
59. Satí marries Siva again: Satí who had attachment to no one else     (ananya-bhává),
again chose Siva, as her one goal (eka-gatim) and as her beloved husband.
60.1 heard this story from Uddhava.
61. Constant hearing and narrating of this pastime with devotion destroys all his sin.
tTlTjáíTl'íjTiV]^^^^                      I x     4.8 Dhruva Mahárája Leaves Home for the Forest
1-5: Lineage of
Causes of destruction and phala-s'ruti
Adharma
6-13: Uttanapada doesn't welcome Dhruva.
6-16: Suruci chastises
Envious and proud Suruci chastises Dhruva
Dhruva. Dhruva's
reaction        '\4    14--16: Angry Dhruva goes to his mother Suniti
17-18: Don't wish ill-fortune for others. Suruci's
17-23: Suniti directs                      words are true
Dhruva to worship the
Lord          •\j 19-23: Worship the Lord like Brahma and Manu for
no one else can extinguish your distress
24-27: Don't he affected hy honour and dishonour.i
28-29: One who understands the law of karma, is
24-34: Nárada tests             satisfied hy whatever comes hy destiny.
4.8                Dhruva's
determination               30-32: The process advised hy your mother is
Dhruva
difficult. Even mystic yogis failed. So, don't try.
Mahárája
33-34: By endurance and right attitűdé one
Leaves                                                      surpasses miseries
Home for
35-62: Dhruva             35-38: Dhruva, "Advise an honest path to attain the
the                                            most exalted position in the three worlds."    1
expresses his
Forest          amhitious goal and             39-62: Nárada, "Go to Madhuvana, practice
Nárada instructs him         astátiga-yoga and meditate on the Lord's form.
on the process to           Chant the dvádas'áksara mantra and worship the
attain it                                  deity."
63-64: Narada inquires ahout Űttánapáda's
moroseness
63-70: Nárada meets
and pacifies               65-67: Uttánapáda regrets his unkind dealings
Uttánapáda
68-70: Nárada informs of Dhruva's safety and
future success
71-77: Dhruva's severe austerities and meditation
71-82: Dhruva's            78-80: The three worlds tremhie, earth pushed
I severe austerities and              down and everyone suffocated
their effects
81-82: The demigods are fearfui hut the Lord
reassures
^39\
Canto 4 Overv                                                                             AJ*:
yéf-
L i n k : While describing the lineages of Manu's daughters, Maitreya also described the
lineages from Brahmá's sons such as Marici (4.1). Now he briefly describes the
lineages of the remaining sons of Brahmá before describing the lineages of Manu's
sons.
1 - 5 : LINEAGE O F A D H A R M A
1. M a n y sons of Brahmá including the Kumaras, Narada, Rbhu, Harhsa, Aruni aud
Yari did uor ger married, but became naisthika-brahmacáris (ürdhva-retasah).
2-4. Lineage of Adharma: (see rhe
Brahma
flowchart)
Note: In the lineage of Irreligion,                            3 Z
there is an unnatural combination               Adharma (Irreligion) + Mrsa (Falsity)
of sex life between hrother and
sister as shown in the adjacent                 Damhha (Bluffing) + Máyá (Illusion)
chart.
5. Phala-sruti: I have briefly described
Lohha (Greed) + Nikrti (Cunning)
the causes of destruction (pratisarga).
One who hears this description three
Krodha (Anger) and Hiitisa (Envy/ Violence)
times - (i) attaius piety (punyam) aud
(ii) washes off his sinfui coutamiuatiou                               IZZZZZZZ
(vidhunoty átmano maiam).                            Kali (Quarrel) + Durukti (Harsh Speech)
Note: This description is purifying                            A Z
Mrtyu (Death) + Bhíti (Fear)
because by hearing about the causes
of destruction, one feels hatred for                           AZ
them and avoids them and thus                 Yátaná (Excessive Pain) + Niraya (Hell)
advances in piety (cleansing heart).
l ink: After describing the impious descendants of Adharma, Maitreya is now eager
to describe the pious activities of Dhruva Mahárája, the most pious king.
6 - 1 7 : S U R U C I CHASTISES D H R U V A AND D H R U V A ' S REACTION
6. N o w Manu's descendants: I shall now describe the descendants of Sváyambhuva
Manu, who - (?) were born of a part of a plenary expansion of the Lord, and
[ii) produced parts of parts of the Lord (like Kapila, Yajfia, Prthu and Rsabha).
7. Manu's sons: Priyavrata and Uttánapáda [vásudevasya             kalayá) were competent to
rule the universe to maintain and protect the citizens.
*?*llí     '&'éí^'&'íí          t f i T A *A*l!í                         *3l.
4.8 Dhruva Mahárája Leaves Home for the Forest
'/»*\-'.' .^•é\ »,» ./éév »,»..>.^»*V-»,» '^***MMliíi ir iiiiiiiiii 1 [liliíi'ilílilíllillliMllllliliWiiliiiiií iiliililiiiitlMHIIIWIIltiflIlilllillllimillinMB
Note: Manu's sons were - (/') born of the Lord's expansion, (ii) themselves
expansions of the Lord, and (iii) produced expansions of the Lord, like Kapila, etc.
8. K i n g Uttánapáda had two queens, named Suniti and Suruci. Suruci was dear to
him but not Suniti, whose son was Dhruva.
Note: Priyavrata was the first son of Manu but Maitreya was so eager to describe
pious activities that he immediately hegan to speak of Dhruva Mahárája, the son of
Uttánapáda.
9. D h r u v a tries to get on his father's lap: Once, Uttánapáda was patting the son of
Suruci, Uttama, on his lap. Dhruva also tried to get on his lap, but the King did not
welcome him.
Note: The King was equally affectionate towards both sons. But because of his
favouritism towards Suruci, he could not welcome Dhruva, despite of his feelings.
10. Suruci's envy and pride: Seeing this, Suruci became very envious (irsyam) and
with great pride (garvitá) she began to speak, while the King listened.
11. Y o u don't deserve: " M y child, although you are also the son of the King, you did
not take birth from my womb. So, you do not deserve to sit on your father's lap or
the throne."
12. Impossible desire: "Being a child, you are unaware that you were not born of my
womb but that of another woman (anya-stri-garbha-sambhrtam).       Know that your
desire is impossible to fulfil (durlabhe 'rthe manorathah)."
13. Worship the L o r d to enter my womb: " I f you still desire to sit on the King's lap,
then worship the Lord by austerities (tapasárádhya purusam). After satisfying the
Lord, by H i s mercy (tasyaivanugrahena), place yourself in my womb."
Note: She indirectly told him to first die and then take his next birth in her womb.
14. Dhruva's anger: Pierced by harsh words (durukti), Dhruva breathed heavily in
anger, like a snake struck by a stick. Seeing his father silent without protest, he
immediately went to his mother weeping.
15. Suniti aggrieved: Suniti immediately lifted Dhruva onto her lap. Hearing about
the harsh words of her co-wife from the other palace residents, she became aggrieved.
16. Suniti's condition: Losing her patience (utsrjya dhairyam), Suniti lamented
(vilalápa) remembering the words of her co-wife, and burned in grief (soka-dáva-
agniná) (like a creeper burned by a forest fire) and shed tears.
L i n k : Not knowing any remedy for the painful situation, Suniti spoke to Dhruva as
follows:
Canto 4
1 7 - 2 3 : S u N í T i DIRECTS D H R U V A T O W O R S H I P THE L O R D
17. D o not wish ill-fortune for others {tnamangalam tata paresu mathstha), because
one who inflicts pains upon others suffers himself from that pain (bhutikte jano yat
para-duhkhadas tat).
18. Whatever Suruci has said is true, because your father feels ashamed to accept
me as his wife or even as a maidservant. Y o u have taken birth from an unfortunate
woman and have grown up by drinking her breast milk.
19. Execute her iustructiou of worshipping the Lord's lotus feet (drddhayddhoksaja-
páda-padmath),  without being envious of her (vimatsarah), if you desire to sit on the
same throne as your stepbrother.
20-21. Only by worshipping the Lord's lotus feet (yasydtighri-padmath paricarya)         -
(i) Brahmá, your great-grandfather, acquired qualifications to create this universe
(ii) Manu, your grandfather, achieved matériái happiness (bhaumath sukhath) and
later liberation (dpavargyam), which are difficult to achieve by other means.
22. So you also take shelter of the Lord - (?) who is kind to his servant (bhrtya-
vatsalath) and (ii) whose lotus feet are sought by aspirants of liberation. Situate the
Lord in your heart (manasy avasthdpya) purified by bhakti-yoga            (nija-dharma
bhdvite) and always engage in H i s service {bhajasva pürusam) without deviation
(ananya bháve).
tam eva vatsásraya    bhrtya-vatsalath
mumuksubhir        mrgya-padábja-paddhatim
ananya-bháve      nija-dharma-bhávite
manasy avasthdpya bhajasva pürusam
Note A: Bhrtya-vatsalam indicates that the Lord's affection for His servant is more
than the affection of millions of mothers put together.
Note B: Even a small child like Dhruva can be purified by the path of bhakti-yoga,
but not by karma-kattda or demigod worship. As soon as one places the Supreme
Lord in one's heart, everything becomes easy and successfui.
23. N o one else is capable of extinguishing your distress except the lotus-eyed Lord.
Laksmi, who holds a lotus in her hand, is sought by many demigods, but even she
chooses to engage in His service.
ndnyath tatah padma-paldsa-locandd
duhkha-cchidath te mrgaydmi kancana
yo mrgyate hasta-grhita-padmayd
sriyetarair anga vimrgyamdtiayd
'Ö^A ' Ö T A 'ifilii' *?*ílí 'í-         4.8 Dhruva Mahárája Leaves Home for the Forest
1^^^^^^           24-34: NÁRADA TESTS D H R U V A ' S DETERMINATION
24. Dhruva leaves home: Hearing his mother's instructions for fulfilling his desire
[artha-dgamam vacah), Dhruva controlled his mind by his intelligence and left home.
25-26. Nárada was astouished hearing this news and approached Dhruva. Touching
the boy's head with his all-virtuous hand (agha-ghnena), he spoke to himself, "How
wonderful are the ksatriyas who cannot tolerate even a slight infringement upon their
prestige (mdna-bhangam amrsyatdm). Though just a small child, he has taken the
harsh words of his stepmother seriously."
Note: How did Nárada know about Dhruva? -
(i)   Nárada is trikdla-jna, and knows everyone's heart just like the Supersoul.
ffi)   As soon as the Lord understands that a living entity is detennined and serious
about entering devotional service. He immediately sends His representative.
27-34: Nárada speaks to Dhruva
27. Don't be affected by honour or dishonour {sammanarh, avamanam) as you are
just a child attached to playing.
Link: "But if you are so developed to understand honour and insult, then you should
also have known that honour and dishonour are both destined only by one's karma."
28. Dissatisfaction is due to karma: Though dualities exist, the cause of
dissatisfaction {asantosa-hetavah) is only one's illusion {mohám), due to previous
karma {nija-karmabhih).
29. So, an intelligent person is satisfied {paritusyet) with whatever comes,
favourable or unfavourable, understanding that it is the Lord's supreme will (isvara-
gatim, daivopasdditarh).
Link: Ndrada came to Dhruva under the direction of the Lord just to initiate him, yet
he is testing Dhruva's determination to execute the process.
30. It is very difficult to satisfy the Lord {durdrddhyo), whose mercy you desire, by
the process taught by your mother.
31. Many mystic yogis failed to understand the path of God realization by samddhi
and austerities, despite trying this process for many births with detachment.
32. Therefore, you should give up your endeavour for it will not be successfui.
When you are grown up, you can attempt this.
33. One who endures any condition of life (happiness or distress), offered by the
supreme will {daiva-vihitam), can cross over the darkness of nescience.
Canto 4 Overview
I   fi*A"€*A'*2*A"€*
yasya yad daiva-vihitam sa tena sukha-duhkhayoh
átmánam tosayan dehi tamasah páram rcchati
Note: By experiencing happiness, one's pious acts are being exhausted, and by
suffering, one's sinfui acts are being exhausted. By satisfaction in both situations, one
crosses over samsara (tamasah).
34. Surpassing miseries:        Upon meeting a . . .         One should...
gunádhikdn mudarh lipsed        More qualified person       Rejoice (not envy)
anukrosarh gunddhamdt           Less qualified person       Feel compassion (not contempt)     |
maitrim samdndd anvicchen       Equally qualified person Be friendly (not be competitive)
na tdpair abhibhüyate           Thus one is never affected by the threefold miseries.
3 5 - 3 8 : D H R U V Á EXPRESSES H I S AMBITIOUS   Goav
35-36.1 can't accept your good advice: Whatever you have explained for attainment
of peace of mind is certainly a very good instruction. But I am not very submissive
(avinitasya) due to my ksatriya temperament. Therefore, your valuable instructions
do not stand in my heart that has been pierced by Suruci's harsh words (durvacah).
37. Advise an honest path to achieve my goal: I desire the most exalted position in
the three worlds (padarh tri-bhuvanotkrstam), one which has not been attained by
my forefathers or others (even Brahmá).
38. Y o u can fulfil my desire: Playing your vina, you travel for the welfare of the
entire universe, just like the sun.
1 9 - 6 2 : NÁRADA INSTRUCTS D H R U V A O N THE PROCESS T O ATTAIN H I S G O A L
39. Narada became pleased (prttah) and mercifully (anukampayá)               gave Dhruva the
following expert advice:
40. I recommend devotional service to Lord Vásudeva, which is described by your
mother. Absorb yourself in H i s worship (bhaja tam pravanátmaná).
41. T h e only way: Worship of the Lord's lotus feet (hareh pdda-sevanam) is the only
method even for achieving the goals of dharma, artha, káma and moksa.
42. Go to Madhuvana on the bank of the Yamuná, where the Lord resides eternally
(nityadd) and become purified (suci) there.
43-44. Practice astáhga-yoga: Take bath three times a day in the auspicious (sive)
Yamuná (yama and niyama), then sit on your dsana, do prdndydma (three kinds of
:mLmmBf£í£mm:m0:tf¥m:mB
4.8 Dhruva Maháraja Leaves Home for the Forest
breathing exercises - recaka, püraka, kumbhaka), gradually control the life air, the
mind and senses (pratydhdra). Thus being free from matériái contamination, meditate
on the Lord with an undisturbed mind (manasd gurund gurum) (dhdrana, dhydna).
45-51: Description of the Lord's form for meditation
45   prasáddbhimukhath sasvat      Always prepared to offer causeless mercy
prasanna-vadaneksanam         Has a joyful face and glancé
sundsarit subhruvam           Has beautiful nose and eyebrows
cáru-kapolath                 Has beautiful forehead
sura-sundaram                 More beautiful than all the demigods
46   tarunath ramaniydngam         Youthful and has attractive limbs
arunostheksanádharam          His lips and eyes like the rising sun
pranatdsrayanath nrmnath      The shelter of the surrendered
Transcendentally pleasing in all respects
saranyam karundrnavam         Worthy of surrender and an ocean of mercy
47   srlvatsdnkarh ghana-syámam    Bears Srivatsa mark on chest, blue in complexion
purusam vana-mdlinam          A person; Wears a flower garland
sankha-cakra-gadd-padmair     With conch, disc, club and lotus
abhivyakta-caturbhujam        Has four arms
48   kiritinath kundalinam         Wears jewelled crown and earrings
keyüra-valayánvitam           Wears jewelled necklace and bracelets
kaustubhdbharana-grivam       Kaustubha jewel around his neck
pita-kauseya-vdsasam          Wears yellow silk clothes
49   kdnci-kaldpa-paryastath       Waist is surrounded by a girdle of small bells
lasat-kdncana-nüpuram         Wears shining golden anklets
darsaniyatamam sdntam         Most charming to look at and peaceful
mano-nayana-vardhanam         Pleasing to the eyes and the mind
50   padbhydm nakha-mani-srenyd    With the jewel-like naiis of His lotus feet glittering.
vilasadbhydrh samarcatdm      He stands on the whorl of the lotus of the hearts of
hrt-padma-karnikd-dhisnyam    those who worship them
dkramydtmany avasthitam       Situated in the heart and intelligence of the jiva
51   smayamdnam abhidhydyet        Meditate on the Lord's smiiing who looks very
sdnurdgdvalokanam             mercifully toward the devotee
niyatenaika-bhütena           Meditate regularly with great attention on the
manasd varadarsabham          greatest benedictor
mMbMiWBBX¥:mtAMmB
Canto 4 Overview
52. Resuit of meditation: One is (?) freed from all matériái contamination (nirvrtyá),
[ii) enriched with the highest bliss {parayd sampannam), and [iii) never deviated from
it {na nivartate).
evam bhagavato rupam subhadram dhyayato manah
nirvrtyd parayd türnath sampannam na nivartate
53-54. Mantra-japa and worship: Along with the meditation, chant this highest
secret dvddasdksara-mantra - "ont namo bhagavate vdsudevdya" ( I will put it in
your right eat). You should worship the Lord's physical form with this mantra and
other various paraphernalia, according to place, time and prescribed methods.
Note A: Why is a confidential mantra mentioned in the writing of Bhágavatam? -
One may receive a published mantra anywhere, but unless it is accepted through
parampará, the mantra has no efficacy.
Note B: How could Dhruva who was not a bráhmana, pronounce pranava
omkára? - He did so on the authority of Nárada Muni.
55-56a. Ingredients: Worship the Lord by offering pure water, garlands, fruits,
fiowers, vegetables, etc, and tulasí leaves which are very dear to H i m [tulasyd
priyayd prabhum). Thus worship the Lord's form made of earth and water
(dravyamayim arcdrh), in the forest.
56b-58. Other instructions:
(i) Control your mind and speech (dbhrta-dtmd, yata-vdk)
(ii) Be peaceful (sdntah)
(iii) Be satisfied with eating whatever is available in the forest (mita-vanya-bhuk).
(iv) Meditate on the Lord's transcendental activities in H i s various incarnations.
(v) Follow the footsteps of previous devotees to worship the Lord       (pürva-sevitdh).
(vi) Chant the müla-mantra and mentally offer (mantra-hrdayena) items that are
unavailable, to He who is nondifferent from the mantra        (mantra-mürtaye).
59-60. Resuit of worship: When one thus engages in devotional service, seriously
and sincerely (amáyindm), with his mind, words and body according to the regulative
principles (bhaktimat), the Lord who increases the ecstasy of H i s devotee (bháva-
vardhanah), blesses him according to his desires.
6 1 . T o achieve special liberation (vimuktaye), one must be aloof from sense
enjoyment (viraktas cendriya-ratau)    and perform bhakti with bhdva without
cessation (nitantara).
62. Dhruva goes to Madhuvana: Dhruva then circumambulated Nárada, offered
obeisances and went to Madhuvana which is always imprinted with the lotus
footprints of Krsna (hares carana-carcitam).
^^ií          'ÍAt'A   ÍAÍIÍÍ   4^jfií I^íTií                                  *lx    4.8 Dhruva Mahárája l
6 3 - 7 0 : NÁRADA M E E T S UTTÁNAPÁDA AND PACIFIES H I M
63. After Dhruva left, Nárada went to meet King Uttánapáda. After being welcomed
properly, Nárada spoke as follows:
64. W h y morose? - " O King, your face is withered. Have you been thinking of
something for a long time? Have you been hampered in following dharma, artha and
kdma?"
Note: Nárada did not inquire about moksa, but only regarding the state management,
which is meant for the advancement of dharma, artha and kdma. Generally, people
engaged in such affairs are not interested in moksa.
65-67:   Űttánapáda's regrets his unkind dealings with Dhruva
65. Merciless and henpecked: I am henpecked [strainena) and merciless (akaruná-
átmand) and have banished [nirvdsitah) my young devotee son and his mother.
66. Unprotected son: M y son is unprotected (andtham) in the forest. He might be
tired, hungry, lying down and the wolves might have attacked him.
67. C r u e l : I was conquered by my wife {stri-jitasya)\ See my cruelty (daurdtmyam)\
Most vile (asat-tamah), I did not welcome my son when he tried to climb on my lap.
68-70:   Nárada informs about Dhruva's safety and future success
68. Do not be aggrieved about your son: (?) He is well protected by the Lord (deva-
guptam) and (ii) though his greatness is yet unknown, His fame will soon spread
throughout the universe (prdvrnkte yad-yaso jagat).
69. Most difficult task: Your son is very competent. After performing tasks difficult
even for the demigods (suduskarath karma krtvd), he will soon return home and will
spread your reputation.
Note: The most difficult task in life is to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and Dhruva Mahárája was going to do that with his determination.
70. After hearing from Nárada, Uttánapáda gave up interest in his wealthy kingdom
and simply began to think of his son.
7 1 - 7 7 : DHRUVA'S SEVERE AUSTERITIES
71. A t Madhuvana, Dhruva took his bath in the Yamuná and observed fasting that
night. Then he worshipped the Lord as instructed by Nárada Muni.
I
•
Canto 4 Overview       fi*      ÍffSCil"*!* iff^^^
*?y!-""»^#7j5X'#7u.*"a--*j»
7 2 - 7 7 : Austerities of Dhruva
Verse     Month         Dhruva Sustaíned on...        Once in...
72     First          Kapittha fruits and berries   Three days
73     Second         Dry grass and leaves          Six days
74     Third          Warer                         Nine days
75     Fourrh         Air                           Twelve days
76-77. B y rhe fifth month, Dhruva controlled his brearh and mind, stood motionless
on one foot like a pillar and meditated on rhe Lord's form without diversion.
78. T h e three worlds rrembled: When Dhruva thus captured rhe Lord, rhe refuge of
rhe rotál matériái creation (ddháram mahad-ddindth) and rhe master of all living
entiries (pradhdna-purusesvaram), rhe three worlds began to tremble.
79. Earth was pushed down: As Dhruva kept himself sreadily standing on one leg,
rhe pressure of his big toe pushed down half rhe earth.
80. Everyone suffocated: When Dhruva became pracrically one in heaviness with
Lord Visnu, due to his full concentration, and closing all the holes of his body, rhe
demigods and residents of all rhe planets felt suffocated and took shelter of rhe Lord.
Note: How could Dhruva become so heavy and push down the earth and
suffocate the universal inhabitants? - Although hundreds of people sitring in an
airplane remain individual unirs, they each share in rhe torai force of rhe airplane.
Similarly, Dhruva, because of his concentration on the Lord, became almost the totál
heaviness and could push down the earth. Moreover, by such spiritual power his unit
body became rhe torai body of the universe. Thus when he closed the holes of his unit
body to firmly concentrate his mind on rhe Lord, all the units of the universe (the
living entities, including demigods) felt suffocated.
81. Demigods to the L o r d : "Dear Lord, we have never experienced such suffocation
(prdna-rodham). Y o u are rhe refuge of all living entities   [cardcarasydkhila-sattva-
dhdmnah) and are worthy of taking shelter [saranyam). Therefore we have
approached you. Kindly save us from this danger."
82. T h e Lord to the demigods: "Do not be perturbed. Ir is due to the severe
austerities of Dhruva, who is now fully absorbed in thought of Me (sangatdtmd). I
shall stop him and thereby, all of you will be saved. Please return."
4.9 Dhruva Mahárája Returns Home
Jl                  Y.
4 . 9 DHRUVA MAHÁRÁJA RETURNS H O M E
1-5: The Lord
appears and                     1-3: Dhruva sees the Lord and feels ecstasy
empowers Dhruva
4-5: The Lord touches Dhruva with His conch
to speak
6-17: Dhruva
Mahárája's prayers       . 18-19:1 will award your matériái desires along with prema
20-22: Dhruvaloka; ruling for 36,000 years without old
18-26: The Lord                                    age
bestows
benedictions to                     23: Uttama and Suruci will die in future
Dhruva and
24: Sacrifices, Enjoyment and Remembrance at the end
departs
_25: Having gone to Dhruvaloka you will not return_
26: The Lord departs
27-28: Dhruva's displeasure and Vidura's inquiry about it
29-31: Dhruva thought, "I have attained the rarest, hut
4.9                                                           feli"
Dhruva
27-36: Dhruva's                    32: Demigods bewildered my intelligence
Mahárája          regret               33-35: Under the influence of maya, I prayed for useless
Returns                                                         things
Home
36: People who taste the Lord's lotus feet don't ask for
matériái things
_ _ _ _     37-45: Uttanapada receives Dhruva
46-47: Even Suruci hiesses Dhruva;
37-53: Reception                          Everyone respects a devotee
of Dhruva
y       _ 48: Uttama and Dhruva embrace each other
49-53: Suniti emhraces Dhruva; people praise Suniti
54-64: Description         54-59: Decorations in the city and Blessings on Dhruva__
of the city and
palace               _...         60-64: Description of the palace
65-67:
Uttanapada              Seeing Dhruva's qualities, Uttanapada enthrones him as
enthrones Dhruva                            emperor and retires
and retires
3**   imBmMtimMimmiíMmm
Canto 4 Overview
1 - 5 : T H E L O R D APPEARS AND EMPOWERS D H R U V A T O SPEAK
H
1. T h e L o r d goes to see D h r u v a : Thus being reassured by the Lord, the demigods
were relieved of fear and returned. Then the Lord got on the back of Garuda and
went to Madhuvana to see His servant Dhruva             (bhrtya-didrksayá).
Note: This incarnation is known as Prsnigarbha. He created the planet known as
Dhruvaloka for the habitation of Dhruva Mahárája.
2. D h r u v a sees the L o r d : The brilliant lightning-like form of the Lord, on which
Dhruva was fully absorbed in meditation, suddenly disappeared. Being perturbed, he
opened his eyes but saw that the Lord in that same form was situated externally.
3. Ecstasy of D h r u v a : Upon seeing the Lord, he was greatly agitated (ágata-
sádhvasah) and offered prostrated obeisances (dandavat). I n ecstasy, he seemed to -
(i) Drink His sweetness with his eyes (drgbhydm prapasyan prapiban iva)
(ii) Kiss His lotus feet with his mouth (cumban iva dsyena)
(iii) Embrace H i m with his arms (bhujaih iva dslisan)
Note: All these features indicate that he developed the eight kinds of transcendental
ecstasy in his body.
4. T h e Lord touches D h r u v a w i t h H i s conch: Understanding Dhruva's desire to
offer prayers and his inability to do so, the Lord mercifully touched H i s conch, which
was nondifferent from the Vedas (brahma-maya), to his forehead.
Note: When one is thus transcendentally inspired (brahma-maya), he becomes
perfectly aware of all Vedic conclusions and the sound he produces exactly
corresponds to the sound vibration of the Vedas.
5. Resuit of the touch of Lord's conch on D h r u v a -
(i) Attained words to describe the Lord (pratipáditárh girarh)
(ii) Understood the knowledge of the Lord and jiva      (parijndta-pardtma-nirnayah)
(iii) Offered his deliberate and conclusive (asatvararh) prayers to the Lord, whose
fame is wide spread (parisruta  uru-sravasam).
6. Enlivener of senses: Obeisances unto Y o u , who are all-powerful (akhila-sakti-
dharah) and who have enlivened all my sleeping senses - hands, legs, ears, skin, life
force and especially power of speech, by Your internál energy (sva-dhdmnd).
wmgmjmMBík                                          4.9 Dhruva Mahárája Returns Home
fltiwfci-rnmrwri-iiin      imiiiilliiltl
yo 'ntah pravisya mama vácam imám prasuptám
sanjivayaty akhila-sakti-dharah     sva-dhámná
anyámé ca       hasta-carana-sravana-tvag-ádin
prándn namo bhagavate purusdya tubhyam
L i n k : The Lord enlivens the senses of His devotees with His internál energy (sva-
dhdmnd). That same energy, as external potency (mdydkhyayd) engages others in
matériái    activities   of sense enjoyment and their senses become matériái          senses. Thus
things are manifested differently to different people.
7. Different manifestations by energies: Y o u are the supreme one, but by Your
energy (dtma-saktyd) called máyá, composed of gunas, You create the universe. As
Supersoul, Y o u enter the matériái senses (like fire entering wood) and manifest things
differently.
8. T h e only shelter: Brahmá could see and understand the universe by the knowledge
given by Y o u due to his surrender (bhavat-prapannah). You are the shelter of
aspirants of liberation (dpavargya-saranam), and the friend of the distressed (drta-
bandho). H o w can a learned person ever forget Your lotus feet?
Note: According to Srila Visvanátha Cakravarti Thákura this verse describes the
three types of devotees who approach the Lord (mentioned in BG 7.16) -
(/) The Lord gives knowledge to jndni-bhakta to see the world
(ii) The Lord's lotus feet are the shelter of a jijnásu-bhakta
(iii) The Lord is the friend of the drta-bhakta
9. Motivated worship: Foolish people (vimusta-matayah) influenced by Your mdyd
worship Y o u for matériái benedictions (kunapopabhogyam), which are available even
in hell (niraye 'pi), although Y o u are - (?) like a desire tree [kalpaka-tarum) and (??)
the cause of liberation (bhavdpyaya-vimoksanam).
Note: Here Dhruva considers himself a foolish arthárthi-bhakta (lowest among the
four sukrtina-bhaktas) who desire matériái benedictions from the Lord.
L i n k : Does it mean that the ultimate benefit of worshipping          the Lord is liberation
(bhavdpyaya-vimoksanam,          brahmdnanda) ?
10. Superiority of bhakti: Bliss derived from - (?) meditation on Your lotus feet
[tava pdda-padma-dhydndd) or (??) hearing Your glories from pure devotees (bhavaj-
jana-kathd-sravana) - is far beyond brahmdnanda. Then what to speak of heavenly
happiness (which is ended by the sword of time)?
H ^ H           Canto 4 Overview       tjj'||'^í$í|í«5jr||^^^
yá nirvrtis tanu-hhrtdm tava pdda-padma-
dhydndd bhavaj-jana-kathd-sravanena vd sydt
sd brahmani sva-mahimany api ndtha md bhüt
kim tv antakdsi-lulitdt patatdm vimdndt
L i n k : But bhakti will not be mature and relishable without          the association   of
devotees. Therefore, Dhruva prays for that association.
11. I want the association of devotees who are pure-hearted (amaldsaydndm) and
engage in bhakti constantly. ( L i n k : But what about crossing samsdra?) Thus, I shall
easily cross (nesye) this dangerous bháva-sdgara,       by becoming mad (mattah) by
drinking the nectar of Your qualities and pastimes      (bhavad-guna-kathdmrta-pdna).
bhaktirií muhuh pravahatdm tvayi me prasango
bhüydd ananta mahatdm amaldsaydndm
yendhjasolbanam uru-vyasanam bhavdbdhim
nesye    bhavad-guna-kathdmrta-pdna-mattah
12. Association gives detachment: One who takes the association of devotees whose
hearts have smelled the fragrance (saugandhya-lubdha-hrdayesu) of Your lotus feet,
does not care for his matériái body, offspring, friends, home, wealth, wife, etc.
te na smaranty atitardm priyam isa martyam
ye cdnv adah     suta-suhrd-grha-vitta-ddrdh
ye tv abja-ndbha    bhavadiya-paddravinda-
saugandhya-lubdha-hrdayesu       krta-prasangdh
Note: From these verses it is understood that destruction of samsdra is a secondary
effect of bhakti, unsought by the devotees.
L i n k : The Lord might ask, "If you knew that devotees do not care for matériái    things,
why did you worship Me for a matériái       position?"
13. Supreme form: Previously I only knew the variety of gross and subtle elements
manifested as animals, trees, birds, reptiles, demigods, humans and the totál universal
form. But I had never experienced Your supreme form as I behold it now. A l l ways
of theorizing have now come to an end.
L i n k 13   14-16: The Lord might ask, "Ifyou    know Me now, teli Me who I am?"
14. Garbhodakasáyí V i s n u : At the end of the kalpa, everything manifested within
the universe enters into H i s belly. He lies on Sesa-nága and from His navel sprouts a
golden lotus, on which Brahmá appears. I offer respects to that Lord.
L i n k : The Lord might ask, "How am I different from the jivas if I also go to sleep?"
Sinf^'S^^A *33(r                                     4.9 Dhruva Mahárája Returns Home
15. Lord vs. jivas: (Therefore the Lord's activities such as sleeping are actions of His
cit-sakti)
H B ^^^^^             Quality of the Lord          Quality of the conditioned soul
nitya-mukta       Eternally liberated          Liberated only by Lord's mercy
parisuddha        Completely pure              Contaminated
vibuddha         Omniscient                   Has little knowledge
átmá          Supreme soul                 Has a matériái bodily covering
küta-stha        Changeless                   Takes many forms
ddi-puruso        Originál personality and     Not the cause
the cause
bhagavdrhs        Full with six opulences      Without good qualities
try-adhisah       Master of three modes        Controlled by the modes
buddhy-avasthitim    Stable in intelligence       Intelligence is subject to conditions of
waking, sleeping and dreaming
akhanditayd sva-    Constant seer through        Has disrupted vision because his
drstyd drastd     the cit-sakti                intelligence undergoes waking,
sleeping, and dreaming
sthitdv        Situated in action of        Cannot even maintain himself
maintaining the universe
adhimakho        Enjoyer of sacrifices        Dependent on sacrifices
L i n k : The Supreme Person is the originál      cause of all causes, but Brahman is the
immediate cause of the matériái    manifestation.    Therefore Dhruva offered respects to
Brahman also.
16. Qualities of Brahman: (?) Has various energies (vividha saktayah) with contrary
natures (viruddha-gatayah), (ii) is the cause of matériái creation (visva-bhavam), (iii)
is one (ekam), (iv) unlimited (anantam), (v) originál (adyam), (vi) blissful (dnanda-
mdtram) and (vii) changeless (avikdram).
Note: The saktis that are contrary in nature are - knowledge and ignorance, creation
and destruction, being born and not being born, being inactive and full of pastimes,
being neutral dtmdráma and being affectionate to the devotees.
L i n k : The Lord might have said, "1 agree that You know my svarüpa.             Though you
have no matériái   desire now, I will give you what you desired earlier." Describing           his
ignorance, Dhruva     prays for the sweetness of bhakti at His lotus feet, and                 for
protection from matériái desires, which are obstacles to bhakti.
Canto 4 Overvíev                                                                                       >t*1
17. Merciful Maintainer
Your lotus feet are the highest attainable
satyásiso hi bhagavams tava        páda-padmam
blessing, surpassing all matériái blessings.
Y o u are the very form of all humán goals,
ásts tathanubhajatah     purusártha-murteh        and are obtainable by those who worship
You without matériái desire.
You mercifully maintain even ignorant
apy evam arya bhagaván paripáti         dinán
devotees like me, like a cow which
vásreva vatsakam anugraha-kdtaro 'smán
protects her calf.
Note: T h e Lord's eagerness to give mercy - A cow gives milk to an ignorant calf
and protects it from wild animals even though the calf does not sérve her. Similarly
the Lord lets even the wretched persons [dinán] who worship H i m with matériái
desires, have a taste of the sweetness of bhakti at H i s lotus feet.
6-17: Dhruva Mahárája's prayers
1    ,                                      1
10-12: Glory of                               17: Please
6-7: Master of     8-9: Shelter o f ;                       13-16: Glory of
Bhakti and                                 protect and
senses           devotees                                  the Lord
Association                                maintain me
6: Enlivener!        8 Shelter            10: Bliss ot     113: Your torm is
I ot my            • of jfíani,              bhakti >       !    Supreme
senses         I jijnásu and          brahmananda
i      árta            and heavenly
I bhaktas                pleasures               14:
7: You                                                      Garbhodakasáyí
manifest                                                  !      Visnu
11:1 want the
9: Shelter         association ot
differently         ot arthárthi        pure devotees
by Your              bhakta                               4 5 : Lord vs. jivas
energies
12: Association;
gives           16: Qualities ot
detachment             Brahman
8 - 2 6 : T H E L O R D BESTOWS BENEDICTIONS T O D H R U V A AND DEPARTS
18. Hearing the prayers of intelligent Dhruva [dhimatah], who had good intentions
(sat-sahkalpena), the Lord, who is very kind to H i s servants [bhrtyánurakto),                 spoke.
19. Bhadram te: " O prince, you have executed pious vows (suvrata),                        and I know
your desire. Although your desire is very difficult to fulfil (durápam),                I w i l l award it,
along with prema [bhadram te).
4.9 Dhruva Mahárája Returns Home
Note: Dhruva was now aspiring for the stage of love of God and became afraid of his
previous matériái desires. The Lord assured him that he would not be bereft of the
Lord's love, by saying, "All good fortune unto you (bhadram te)."
20-21.1 shall award you Dhruvaloka w h i c h -
(i) continues to exist ever after dissoiution.
(ii) is not ruled by anyone
(iii) is circumambulated by all the luminaries, like bulls treading around a central
pole to grind grains.
(iv) is circumambulated by all the stars inhabited by the great sages like Dharma,
Agni, Kasyapa and Sukra, keeping it to their right.
22. Y o u w i l l rule with dharma (dharma-samsrayah) for 36,000 years, after your
father retires to the forest. Your senses will remain strong (avydhata indriyah).
23. Y o u r hrother, Uttama w i l l die in the future while hunting, and his mother
(Suruci) will be devoured by a forest fire while searching for him.
24. Sacrifices, Enjoyment and Rememhrance at death: After worshipping Me, the
heart of sacrifice (yajha-hrdayam),     by sacrifice and great charities (puskala-
daksinaih), and after enjoying blessings in this world, you will remember Me at the
time of death (ante mám samsmarisyasi).
25. Thereafter, you w i l l go to M y planet (Dhruvaloka), which is - worshipped hy
all planets (sarva-loka-namaskrtam) and is situated above the planets of the seven
rsis- Having gone there you will not return."
Note: Dhruvaloka, or the polestar, is the abode of Lord Visnu within this matériái
world. Upon it there is a milk ocean, within which is an island called Svetadvipa. At
the time of dissoiution of this universe, the eternal Dhruvaloka remains, like other
Vaikunthalokas beyond this universe.
26. T h e Lord left: After being worshipped and after offering him His abode. Lord
Visnu, on the back of Garuda, returned to His abode, as Dhruva looked on.
27-36: DHRUVA'S REGRET
27. Dhruva's displeasure: Despite achieving the desired resuit of his determination
(sanklapa-nirvánam),   by worshipping the lotus feet of the Lord, Dhruva was not very
pleased (nátipritah). He returned to his home.
28. Vidura inquired about Dhruva's displeasure: " I n just one life, Dhruva achieved
the Lord's abode by worshipping His lotus feet (tac-caranárcanárjitam).    This is very
rare (sudurlabham). Though very wise (artha-vit), why did he still feel unfulfilled?"
r.into 4 OvcTviow
'^¥mzmzmmímm
Maitreya continued -
29. Dhruva felt remorse: Dhruva, remembering his past aspirations, felt totally
unqualified to accept mukti (association with the Lord) awarded by the Lord (mukti-
pati). Hence, with intense shame, regret, humility and disgust he spoke to himself.
Note: When the Lord said that he would fulfil his matériái desires and also punish his
stepmother, Dhruva became ashamed and repented, thinking the Lord knew his crime
of possessing matériái desires, being not service to the Lord but service to the senses.
30-35: Lamentation of Dhruva
30. Attained the rarest, but feli: "Having attained the shade of the Lord's lotus feet
in just six months, which even great personalities (like the Kumáras) could attain only
after many births, I feli from that position due to having other desires (prthak-matih).
Note: Dhruva remembered that he was situated in the shade of the Lord who was
seated on Garuda.
31. I desired perishable things, although attaining the lotus feet of the Lord, who
can destroy matériái existence (bhava-cchidah). I am unfortunate       (manda-bhágya),
bodily conscious {anátmyam) and foolish!
32. T h e demigods bewildered my intelligence, being intolerant and envious of my
being elevated to Vaikuntha. Thus, I could not accept the genuine advice of Nárada.
33. Máyá's influence: Taking shelter of the Lord's mdyd, I was sleeping on her lap.
Under a vision of duality, I saw my hrother as my enemy, and falsely lamented.
34.1 prayed for useless things, which are like medicine given to a dead man. Having
pleased the Lord (jagaddtmdnam) who is difficult to please (dusprasddanam), I
prayed for matéria! enjoyment, devoid of fortune.
35. I wanted matériái prosperity, name and fame (mdnah), although the Lord
offered me His personal service (svdrdjyam). I was like a foolish poor man who asks
for only a few grains of broken rice from an emperor.
Maitreya to Vidura -
36. Satisfaction in Service                                         -iWiMHMW
na vai mukundasya paddravindayo            Persons like you who taste the dust from
rajo-jusas tata bhavddrsd jandh          Mukunda's lotus feet (rajo-jusah)
are always satisfied in serving Him and
vanchanti tad-dásyam rte 'rtham atmano        never ask for matériái prosperity. Their
yadrcchayd labdha-manah-samrddhayah           minds are completely satisfied with
whatever comes on its own accord.
m¥m:mBm^mmmBm:MB
'54^0'ÖMÍr*^^                                        4.9 Dhruv a Maharaja Returns Home
L i n k : Now Maitreya   describes Dhruva's returning from Madhuvana and meeting his
relatives.
3 7 - 5 3 : RECEPTION O F D H R U V A
37-38. Uttánapáda couldn't believe his fortune when he heard that Dhruva was
coming back. Nevertheless, keeping faith on Nárada's words (4.8.69), Uttánapáda
became elated and presented the messenger with a valuable necklace.
39-40. He eagerly came out of the city on a chariot, with elders, ministers and
friends, with the sounding of conches, drums, flutes, and the cbanting of the Yedas.
41. Suniti, Suruci and Uttama also came out, riding in a palanquin.
Note: After being comforted by Nárada, Uttánapáda showed favour to Dhruva's
mother, and did not show favour to Uttama's mother. Suniti, endowed with the best
behaviour, had Suruci and Uttama ride in her palanquin.
42-44, Uttánapáda meets D h r u v a : Seeing Dhruva, Uttánapáda hastily got down
from his chariot and with great affection, embraced the boy who had destroyed
unlimited sins (hatdsesdgha-bandhanam) by the touch of the Lord's feet (visvaksena
anghri-samsparsa). His long-cherished desire fulfilled, the King smelled Dhruva's
head again and again and bathed him with cold tears.
45. D h r u v a offered respects: Dhruva, the foremost of all nobles      (saj-jandgranih),
paid obeisances to his father's feet and bowed his head at the feet of his two mothers.
Note: Dhruva paid obeisances to Suruci also, because after seeing the Lord, he was
completely freed from all contamination of matériái desire.
46. Suruci blessed D h r u v a : Seeing Dhruva fallen at her feet, Suruci picked him up,
embraced him, and with tears blessed him, " M a y you live long!"
L i n k : How is it that Suruci is showing affection to Dhruva whom she hated before?
47. Everybody respects a devotee: A l l living beings naturally offer respect to that
person who has transcendental qualities due to friendly behaviour with the Lord, just
as water automatically flows down by nature.
yasya prasanno bhagavdn gunair maitry-ddibhir harih
tasmai namanti bhütdni nimnam dpa iva svayam
48. Uttama and D h r u v a embraced each other, overwhelmed by the ecstasy of love
and affection. Their hairs stood on end and they shed torrents of tears.
49. Suniti embraced D h r u v a , who was dearer to her than her own life. Thus she
forgót all matériái grief and was satisfied by touching his body.
•                                'í*-*»5,''**3 ^ * : * - - « J € x ^ 3 c ? 5 , ^ * *
50. Abhiseka of D h r u v a : Suniti was the mother of a great hero (vtra-sü). Her tears,
along with milk from her breasts, wet Dhruva's body. This was auspicious.
Note: The auspiciousness of the abhiseka ceremony performed by his mother
indicates that Dhruva Mahárája would soon be installed on the throne of his father.
51-52. People praised Suniti: " B y good fortune your son, destroyer of suffering, has
come back after being lost for a long time. He will protect the whole earth. Y o u must
have worshipped the Lord, who delivers His devotees from dangers        (pranatdrti-há)."
Persons who constantly meditate upon H i m conquer unconquerable death."
53. Back to the city: When everyone was thus praising Dhruva, the King, being
pleased, placed Dhruva and his hrother on an elephant and returned to his city.
5 4 - 5 9 : DECORATIONS IN THE C I T Y AND BLESSINGS O N DHRUVA                                  | | |
54. C i t y : The whole city was decorated with columns of banana trees, betel nut trees,
and many shark shaped arched gateways.
55. Doors: Each and every door was draped with mangó leaves, coloured cloth and
strings of pearls, and was decorated with water pots and lamps.
56. Gates, walls and domes: The city's gates and surrounding walls were all
decorated with golden ornaments. The domes of the city palaces glittered, as did the
domes of the beautiful airplanes which hovered over the city.
57. Streets and watchtowers: A l l the quadrangles, lanes, streets, and watchtowers
had been cleansed and sprinkled with sandalwood water. Flowers and fruits, and
auspicious grains such as rice and barley, were scattered all over the city.
58-59. T h e chaste women offered their blessings upon Dhruva as he passed on the
road, showering him with white mustard seeds, barely, curd, water, dürva grass,
fruits and fiowers. While hearing their pleasing songs, Dhruva entered the palace.
6 0 - 6 4 : DESCRIPTION O F THE PALACE                             |||||||||||^^
60. Dhruva thereafter lived in his father's palace, covered with valuable jewels, and
being cared for by his affectionate father. He lived like a demigod in heaven.
6 1 . T h e bedding in the palace was as white as the foam of milk and was very soft.
The bedsteads were made of ivory with embellishments of gold, and the chairs,
benches and other furniture were made of gold.
62. Walls were made of marble with many engravings made of valuable jewels,
which depicted beautiful women with jewel lamps in their hands.
4.y Dhruva Maháraja Returns Home
63. Pleasant gardens were fiiled with trees brought from heaven. I n those trees were
pairs űf sweetly singing birds and buzzing, intoxicated bumblebees.
64. Lakes with emerald staircases were fiiled with blue and white Iotuses, swans,
ducks, cakravdkas and cranes.
65. Saintly Uttanapada wondered, hearing and seeing the great influence of Dhruva.
66. Dhruva's qualities and coronation: Seeing - (?) Dhruva's maturity (üdha-
vayasam), (ii) the ministers' approval (prakrtlndth ca sammatam) and (?'?'?') the
citizens' love for him (anurakta-prajam) - Uttánapáda enthroned Dhruva as emperor
of this planet.
67. Uttánapáda retired: After considering his advanced age and deliberating on the
welfare of his spiritual self, King Uttánapáda became detached and entered the forest.
¥.^MBm¥i^M^:¥:mBmM
1-2: Dhruva's marriages and descendants
3-7: Uttama killed by a Yaksa; Dhruva goes to Alakapuri
8-12: Dhruva and the Yaksas release arrows at each other
4.10 Dhruva
Mahárája's             H   13-17: Analogies describing Dhruva defeating and killing the Yaksas
fight with the
18-21: The injured Yaksas flee from the battlefield and Dhruva
Yaksas                                          anticipates an attack
22-28: lliusions created by the Yaksas to bewilder Dhruva
29-30: Sages arrive and offer prayers for Dhruva's protection
L i n k : Mahárája     Uttánapáda,     a rájarsi,   was anxious for self-realization.      He thus
enthroned his worthy son Dhruva,              and retired to the forest (4.9.67), even before
getting his son married.
f - 2 : DHRUVA'S MARRIAGES AND DESCENDANTS
1. D h r u v a + Bhrami (daughter of Prajápati Sisumára)             1 sons, Kalpa and Vatsara.
2. Dhruva + Ilá (daughter of Váyu)              a beautiful daughter and a son, Utkala.
3- 7: Uttama killed by a Yaksa. Dhruva goes to Alakapuri
3. Uttama's death: Dhruva's hrother, Uttama was killed by a Yaksa while hunting.
Suruci also died. (These events were predicted by the Lord in 4.9.23.)
4- 5. Dhruva's anger: Hearing this, Dhruva was overwhelmed with anger and
lamentation and headed north to reach Alakapuri, the city of the Yaksas (followers of
Lord Siva).
©
6-7. D h r u v a blew his conch and the sky echoed. The wives of the Yaksas became
frightcned. Unable to tolerate that sound, the Yaksas came out to attack Dhruva.
8-12: Dhruva and the Yaksas release arrows at each other
8. Three arrows: Dhruva began killing them by shooting three arrows at a time.
9. Yaksas praise D h r u v a : The Yaksas, being shot in their foreheads, anticipated
defeat. But still, in a ksatriya spirit, they praised Dhruva's feat in their minds.
to. Six arrows: Intolerant, like snakes being trampled, the Yaksas shot six arrows
each at Dhruva, in retaliation.
t t - t 2 . T h e 130,000 Y a k s a soldiers began angrily showering Dhruva, his chariot and
his charioteer with various types of weapons.
13-17: Analogies of the Fight
P      Description            Analogy''                Significance
13    Dhruva became          As a mountain is         With rain, dirty things are washed
covered by a           covered by torrents      from a mountain. Similarly, with
shower of weapons      of rain (ásárena         the arrows, whatever incompetence
yathá girih)             Dhruva had, was washed away and
his vigour was renewed.
14    The Siddhas cried      As the sun sets in the   Although seeming to drown in the
as Dhruva              ocean [süryo             ocean, the sun is not harmed.
appeared to mérge      magnak arnave)           Similarly Dhruva had no difficulty.
among the Yaksas
15    As the Yaksas          As the sun appears       Insignificant fog cannot cover the
proclaimed victory,    from foggy mist          sun. By comparison to the sun,
Dhruva re-emerged      (nihdrdd iva             Dhruva's greatness is affirmed.
bhdskarah)
16    Dhruva scattered       As the wind scatters     His twanging bow created dismay
the Yaksas'            clouds in the sky
weapons with his       [ghanáníkam
arrows                 ivánilah)
17    His sharp arrows       As thunderbolts          Earlier the mountain of Dhruva was
pierced their bodies   pierce mountains         revitalized by the Yaksas' attack.
[girin asanayo           Now the mountain of Yaksas are
yathá)                   being killed by Dhruva's attack.
1%
18-21: The injured Yaksas flee from the hattlefield
18-19. C u t limbs and ornaments: The battlefield, attractive to the minds of heroes,
was filled with the bodily limbs and the ornaments of the Yaksas.
20. Yaksas fled: The injured Yaksas fearfully fled the battlefield, like elephants
defeated by a lion.
21. Dhruva's suspicion: Observing no Yaksas on the battlefield, Dhruva desired to
see Alakapuri. But being doubtful of the deceptive Yaksas, he did not enter the city.
22-28: lliusions created hy the Yaksas to hewilder Dhruva
22-24. Dust storm and rain: While expressing his doubts to his charioteer, Dhruva
heard sounds as if an ocean were there, and then a dust storm appeared. Within a
moment, the sky was overcast with clouds, lightning and thunder. It rained blood,
mucus, pus, stool, urine, etc. Even humán trunks began to fali.
25. Mystic mountain: Dhruva then saw a mountain in the sky. Hailstones feli from
all directions along with maces, swords, clubs and showers of stones.
26. Animals: Deadly snakes, mad elephants, tigers and lions approached to devour
him.
27. Ocean: The fierce ocean, roaring with waves, approached him as if it were the
time of dissoiution.
28. Visions: The cruel-natured Yaksas created many such visions by their demoniac
powers, to terrify the cowardly.
29-30: Sages arrive and offer prayers for Dhruva's protection
29. Sages arrived: Hearing that Dhruva was overpowered by the illusory tricks of the
Yaksas, the great sages immediately arrived to encourage him.
30. Prayer by the Sages: " M a y the Supreme Lord Sárhgadhanvá, who relieves the
distress of devotees [avanatárti-haro)  kill your enemies. Simply by cbanting or
hearing His holy name, one can easily be protected from insurmountable death.
Note: By offering this prayer, the sages also reminded Dhruva about the náráyanástra
weapon, which is capable of destroying this illusion.
munaya ücuh
auttánapáda bhagavárhs tava      sárngadhanvá
devah ksinotv avanatárti-haro     vipaksán
yan-námadheyam      abhidháya nisamya cáddhá
loko 'njasá tarati dustaram anga mrtyum
4.11 S\.iv.iinl)liu\.i Mami Vlvises Dliiu\a
4 . 1 1 SVÁYAMBHUVA M A N U ADVISES
1-5: Dhruva             1-3: Dhruva employs the náráyanástra on the
Yaksas
overcomes the
Yaksas' illusions and
4-5: As the agitated Yaksas rushed, Dhruva cut \
massacres them                their limbs and sent them to Satyaloka    í
7: Excessive anger is the sinfui path of ignorance
/ 8: It's not befitting our dynasty, condemned by I
6-14: Manu's
í/|^                  the virtuous         _______J
reasons not to k                 9: It's the fault of only one Yaksa!          i
the Yaksas
10-12: Killing others' bodies (temples of Lord) is
\ the bodily conception. You are destined to go
to Vaikuntha; be exemplary
4.11
13-14: Focus on pleasing the Lord
Sváyambhuva
Manu Advises                                    15-18: By His inconceivable energies, the
; Supreme Lord is the indirect cause of the crea­
Dhruva to                                  tion, maintenance and destruction of everyone
stop fighting
19-21: As Time, the Lord is neutral towards
15-26:              everyone and awards happiness or distress as
Understanding the                        per one's karma
ultimate cause as
the Supreme Lord               22-24: Different philosophers may have
different opinions, hut the Lord is the ultimate
cause of hirth and death (of your hrother also)
25-26: But the Lord is unaffected as He does
everything hy His energies.
27-29: Turn your attention to the Lord who is
the controller and is transcendental
27-35: Give up
30-32: Regain your natural position hy bhakti.
anger and surrender
Give up anger and the bodily concept of life.
unto the Lord
33-34: Pacify Kuvera
Canto 4 Overview ' ^ ^ f i í ^ ' M * ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^
- «-^»*x**-1-5: DHRUVA O V E R C O M E S THE YAKSAS' ILLUSIONS AND MASSACRES T H E M
1-2. Náráyanástra vanquished illusions: Hearing the encouraging words of the
sages, Dhruva Mahárája performed ácamana and fixed the náráyanástra on his bow.
Then the illusions immediately vanished, just as suffering disappears when knowledge
arises (klesá jnánodaye yathá).
3. A r r o w s : The weapon fired arrows with shafts of gold and feathers of swans,
which entered the enemy soldiers with a tumultuous sound, like peacocks in a forest.
4. Yaksas agitated: Oppressed by those sharp arrows, the Yaksas were agitated and
angrily rushed at Dhruva with raised weapons, like snakes with raised hoods
attacking Garuda.
5. D h r u v a kills them: Dhruva then cut off the limbs of the Yaksas with his arrows
and sent them to the planet above the sun globe (Brahmaloka), which is attainable
only by first class brahmacárts (ürdhva-retasah   or jnánis).
Note: To be killed either by the Lord or a pure devotee is very auspicious for the non-
devotees. However, the Yaksas killed by Dhruva, although entering Satyaloka, will
not be liberated at the end of Brahmá's life, but will come back to this earth.
6-14:   SVÁYAMBHUVA M A N U ' S REASONS N O T T O KILL T H E YAKSAS
6. M a n u arrived: Seeing the many innocent Yaksas being killed, Sváyambhuva Manu
approached his grandson Dhruva Mahárája along with many sages, and spoke out of
compassion.
7. Excessive anger is sinfui: "Enough! Excessive anger (atirosa) is the sinfui path of
ignorance (tamo-dvárena  pápmana). Y o u already killed many offenceless Yaksas.
8. T h i s act is: (?) not befitting our dynasty (násmat kulocitam) and (?'?') condemned by
the virtuous (sad-vigarhitam).
9. K i l l i n g many for one's fault: It has been proven that you are affectionate to your
hrother and aggrieved about his death. But for the fault of one Yaksa, you have
killed many just because of their connection.
10. Bodily identification: Killing others' bodies due to bodily identification, like
animals do, is not the path of sádhus, the Lord's followers (hrsikesa        anuvartinám).
11. Avoid unnecessary killing: Y o u are fortunate that, by worshipping Lord H a r i ,
you are already destined to achieve V a i k u n t h a , which is difficult to attain. Since
every living entity is a residence (or a temple) of the Supreme Lord            (bhütávása),
unnecessary killing is not permitted.
'tA*A ' t S l ( í 'filÍMÍÍ S * l f í
**x,5Ax**v5"->''?3t?A>W\,.5"-»'3*3c5'j'*^
4.11 Sváyambhuva Manu Advises Dhruva
^H^^^^^^H
12. I am surprised by your act, because you are (?) a pure devotee, always
remembered by the Lord, (ii) recognized by His devotees like Nárada, and {iii)
supposed to be an example for others.
13. T h e L o r d is pleased w i t h his devotee if he is
(i)   titiksayd - tolerant towards seniors and when ill-treated by the envious
(ii)   karunayá - merciful towards inferiors and the ignorant
(iii)   maitryá - friendly towards equals
(iv)    samatvena - equal to everyone (considering their happiness and distress as
one's own)
titiksayd karunayá  maitryá    cákhila-jantusu
samatvena ca sarvátmá    bhagaván samprasidati
14. When the Lord is pleased, one becomes free from the gunas (gunaih-vimukto)
and from one's gross and subtle bodies (jiva-nirmukto). Then one achieves the Lord's
abode    (brahma-nirvánam).
L i n k : When Manu saw that Dhruva Mahárája                was still dissatisfied because of his
brother's death, he further explained who is actually the killer and who is being killed.
1 5 - 2 6 : UNDERSTANDING THE ULTIMATE C A U S E AS THE SUPREME L O R D
15. Creation: Lrom the five elements, the male and female bodies are created and by
their interaction, further male and female bodies are developed.
Note: Dhruva was indirectly advised not to be afflicted by his brother's death because
bodily relationships are completely matériái.
16. Maintenance and Destruction: Like creation takes place, maintenance and
destruction of the bodies takes place by the action of the gunas, through the Lord's
máyá.
L i n k : "How can creation, maintenance and destruction           of bodies take place,    without
somé foundation of             consciousness?"
17. T h e Lord indirectly causes (nimitta-mátram)            the movements of the universe and
its many causes and effects, like a magnet indirectly causes the movements of iron.
L i n k : If the Lord is aloof, how is everything being done?
18. T h e Lord's inconceivable energies (durvibhávyá): By His kála-sakti, the modes
are agitated (guna-praváha) and thus varieties of energies (vibhakta-viryah) manifest.
It appears that the Lord is acting but He is not.
L i n k : See His supreme authority and other inconceivable         powers.
•l*''-c.5'-3' *!*Ks*T*.
Canto 4 Overview
f   fi»*M*M*l^^^^^^^
'^A^^Í^Z!-'í?A^A:A'Cz^2-^?i^
19. As T i m e , the Lord is indestructible, beginningless and inexhaustible, yet He
causes birth and death for the living entities.
Note: The Lord is like a touchstone that creates many valuable stones and jewels but
does not decrease in power.
L i n k : Though the Lord acts in this way. He cannot be accused of injustice, since He is
neutral.
20-21. T h e Lord as time is neutral towards all beings. Lveryone suffers or enjoys the
results of his own karma, but follows time, just as dust particles are carried by the
wind. Thus someone may have a long life or a short life, but the Lord always remains
transcendentally situated.
L i n k : 4.11.20-21 says that karma is the cause of the living entity's happiness             and
distress. However different philosophers argue about this.
22. Opinions of different philosophers about the cause of dualities
Philosophers                                   Attribute the cause to        m|
Mimárhsakas                                     Karma (fruitive activities)
f Lokáyatas (followers of Cárváka)                  Svabháva (nature)
Vyavahárikas (followers of the Puránas)        Kála (time)
Astrologers                                    Daivam (fate)
Vatsyayana                                     Káma (lust)
L i n k : But none of the above philosophers establish the truth (for they are ignorant of
the Lord who is the root cause of everything) because -
23. No philosopher can understand the Lord's plan: He is unmanifested (avyakta),
transcendental (aprameya) and the master of various energies (náná-sakty-udayasya).
Note: The philosophers mentioned in 4.11.22 consider that the various energies of the
Lord (karma, svabháva, kála, daiva and kdma) cause the different destinations,
happiness and distress of the living entities. However, these philosophers do not
understand that the Lord is the master of ali these energies, as established in 4.11.23.
24. These followers of Kuvera are not the killers of your hrother for the Supreme
Lord is the cause of birth and death.
L i n k : However the Lord is not to be blamed.
25. T h e Lord is unaffected: The Lord is the creator, maintainer and destroyer of the
universe. But, He is never affected by falsé ego (anahankárán)    nor by the matériái
modes in such activities (nájyate guna-karmabhih).
mMmmfmmímmíimmB¥mBmi
4.11 Sváyambhuva Manu Advises Dhruva
L i n k : How does the Lord remain aloof from ego and gunas?
26. Through H i s external energy [sva-saktyá            máyayá),    the Lord, who is the
Supersoul {bhütdtmd),   controls [bhütesa) and maintains (bhüta-bhdvanah)            all beings.
L i n k : Dhruva - "Though I have been enlightened by you, I cannot give up my ego."
7-35: G I V E U P ANGER AND SURRENDER UNTO THE TRANSCENDENTAL L O R D U
27-30: Surrender unto the Lord
27. Controller: Surrender unto the Lord in all respects. He is both life (amrtam) for
devotees and death (mrtyum) for demons. Everyone is under His control, like a buli is
controlled by a rope through its nose.
L i n k : You're already a surrendered soul, so don't do anything     unbefitting!
28. Y o u r achievement: At the age of five, being afflicted by the harsh words of your
stepmother, you entered the forest, engaged in austerity and worshipped the Lord.
Thus you achieved the topmost position in the three worlds.
29. Therefore, turn your attention to the L o r d , who is transcendental (nirgunam),
infallible (aksaram) and uncontaminated (vimuktam). Thus you will find matériái
differentiation to be mere flickering (ásat).
30. Regaining your natural position and by rendering devotional service (bhaktim
vidhdya) to the Lord, you will forget the illusion of " I " and " M i n e . "
Note: Dhruva was already liberated because at the age of five he saw the Lord, but he
was temporarily afflicted by the illusory bodily conception of life due to his brother's
death. Now Manu reminded him that he should not continue in this matériái
conception of " I " and "mine."
31-32. C i v e up your anger by my instructions, for anger - (?) is the foremost enemy
on the path of spiritual realization, (?'?) is detrimental for those who desire liberation
and (?'?"?') makes one a source of dread for all others.
33-34. Pacify K u v e r a : Thinking the Yaksas to be killers of your hrother, you killed
them recklessly. Thus you disrespected and agitated the mind of Kuvera, the hrother
of Lord Siva. Immediately pacify Kuvera by gentle words and prayers so that his
wrath may not affect our family.
35. M a n u returns: After thus instructing Dhruva and being worshipped by him,
Manu returned to his abode.
Canto 4 Overview
* H 3 f X*? 7 J € X # - * - * " X ^ 7 _ « € x ^ €        7 Jfx*!*
« Y ^ « Z
4 . 1 2 DHRUVA G O E S BACK T G G O D H E A D
fe7Z*Z
1: Kuvera appears and speaks to Dhruva
1-9: Kuvera's          /         2-7: Time causes creation and destruction. Bodily
instructions and
conception causes repeated birth and death. Please
benedictions to
worship the Lord and ask for any benediction.
Dhruva
8-9: Dhruva asks for unflinching faith and
rememhrance of the Supreme Lord. Kuvera returns to
his kingdom.
10-11: Dhruva worships the Supreme Lord through I
sacrifices and bhakti, seeing the Lord in everything and
everything in the Lord.
10-16: Dhruva's
glorious rule and                           12: Qualities of Dhruva Mahárája.
renunciation
13-16: Rule and Retirement of Dhruva Mahárája
17-18: Practice of astanga-yoga and deveiopment of
4.12                                                ecstatic symptoms due to constant bhakti.
Dhruva
Goes Back                                          19-22: Lord Visnu's associates arrive in an airplane.
to                                              Dhruva folds his hands and chants the holy name,
absorbed in thoughts of Krsna's lotus feet.
Godhead
17-35: Dhruva
23-27: Nanda and Sunanda speak to Dhruva and invite
Mahárája ascends                                     him ahoard.
to Dhruvaloka
28-31: Dhruva hoards the pláne, piacing his foot on
the head of death. Demigods shower fiowers.
36-40: Glories of
Dhruvaloka                      32-33: Dhruva remembers his mother Suniti, hut then
sees her leaving in another airplane.
34-35: Dhruva's airplane passes through many
planetary systems and arrives on Dhruvaloka.
41-43: Nárada
Muni glorifies
Dhruva Mahárája attained the unconquerable Lord at a
Dhruva at the
j         very young age and in a very short time.
Pracetás' sacrifice
J
44-52: Phala-sruti |
üWBmw£mmm:mBmwB
t7t fi    ¥íiWfi¥íiW(í'¥
'^3*y3f..'^*3^A3^Jl^y3^^
4.12 Dhruva Goes Back to Godhead
1 -9: INSTRUCTIONS AND BENEDICTIONS O F KUVERA T O D H R U V A
1. Kuvera appears: Learning that Dhruva's anger had subsided, Kuvera appeared and
spoke to bim.
2. Y o u are sinless: " O sinless one (anagha), I am very pleased to know tbat you bave
given up your enmity, wbicb is very difficult to avoid.
L i n k : Kuvera    addressed Dhruva as sinless, but Dhruva          may have thought himself
otherwise, having just killed so many Yaksas. Therefore Kuvera reassures him.
3. T i m e is the cause: Actually, you bave not killed tbe Yaksas nor did tbey kill your
brotber. Tbe eternal time feature of tbe Lord is tbe ultimate cause of botb creation
and destruction.
4. Bodily conception: But, tbe bodily conception of " I " and " y o u " (aham-tvam),
like a dream, is a product of ignorance and misconceived intelligence {apartha dhir).
It is tbe cause of repeated birtb and deatb (bondage and misery).
5-6. So, please worship the Lord wbo bas tbe following features:
(i)   Beyond sensory perception (adhoksajam)
(ii)   Tbe Supersoul of all living entities wbo are tbus one without distinction
(iii)   Transcendental in form (vigraham)
(iv)    His lotus feet are worshipable (bhajantydnghrim)
(v)   Without birtb or deatb (abhavdya)
(vi)   Delivers from materialistic existence    (bhava-cchidam)
(vii)   Joined to (yuktam) mdyd because it is H i s sakti
(viii)   Aloof from (virahitam) mdyd because it is not His svarüpa
7. Please ask a benediction without besitation. We bave beard tbat you are
constantly engaged in tbe loving service of tbe Lord's lotus feet."
Note: Simply by engaging in devotional service, one can have all the benedictions of
the world without separate endeavour.
8. Remembering the L o r d : Being tbus requested, bigbly elevated (mahd-bhdgavata)
and intelligent (mahd-matih) Dhruva asked for unflinching faitb in and remembrance
of {acalitdm smrtim) tbe Supreme Lord, by wbicb one can easily cross over
unsurpassable nescience.
Note A : Although the king of kings [rdja-rája) Kuvera, the treasurer of the demigods,
could have offered immense riches, Dhruva did not ask for such, knowing their
insignificance. Rather he asked for the pancama-purusártha,             the constant
remembrance of the Supreme Lord's lotus feet.
Canto 4 Overview
Note B: Kuvera was not an unailoyed devotee and Dhruva was more spiritualiy
advanced than him. Yet, Dhruva asked Kuvera for unbroken remembrance of the
Lord. Because of Manu's words in 4.11.34 (the wrath of great personalities may affect
our family), Dhruva was apprehensive that Kuvera's displeasure might act as an
obstacle for his krsna-smaranam. Now Dhruva's request would naturally remove any
lingering resentment on Kuvera's part due to Dhruva's offence.
9. Kuvera gladly offered the benediction and Dhruva returned back to bis kingdom.
1 0 - 1 6 : DHRUVA'S G L O R I O U S RULE AND RENUNCIATION
10. Sacrifices: By great sacrifices and profuse charities, Dhruva worshipped tbe
Supreme Lord wbo is tbe master, objective and tbe result-giver of sacrifices.
11. B h a k t i : Engaged in unrelenting bhakti unto Lord Acyuta, Dhruva saw H i m
situated in all beings and everything situated in H i m .
pjl 2. Dhruva Mahárája's qualities:
tam evam sila-sampannam          Endowed with all godly qualities
brahmanyam dina-vatsalam         Respectful to tbe bráhmanas,    kind to tbe poor
goptáram dharma-setünám          Protector of religious principles
menire pitaram prajáh          Considered as father by tbe citizens
13. Rule: Dhruva ruled over Bbü-mandala for 36,000 years. He desired to (?) diminisb
bis pious results by enjoyment and (ii) destroy bis sinfui reactions by austerities.
Note: Dhruva desired to destroy sinfui reactions only out of humility. Actually he did
not have any pious or sinfui reactions since he had developed prema. A devotee is not
concerned with enjoyment or distress, but simply desires to execute bhakti.
14-16. Retirement: Dhruva tbus passed many years, favourably executing dharma,
artha and káma. Thereafter, be realized tbis world to be like a Gandbarva city in a
dream; a creation of mdyd (mdyd-racitam). Considering bow tbe body, bodily
relations, possessions and kingly opulences will be affected by time, be handed over
tbe kingdom to bis son and retired to Badarikásrama.
17-35: DHRUVA MAHÁRÁJA ASCENDS TO DHRUVALOKA
17. Astánga-yoga: Dhruva purified bis senses and bathed regularly {yama and
niyama), practiced sitting postures {dsana), controlled bis breathing {prdndydma),
witbdrew bis senses {pratydhdra), meditated on tbe arcd-vigraha {dhdrana and
dhydna) and entered into trance {samddhi).
ímimmBmmxmmmm^mímm'ií                                                                             •••4
Ö ^ f r ^ f í í í ' Öl^'Ö"^^^^                            4.12 Dhruva Goes Back to Godhead
18. Ecstatic symptoms: By his constant bhakti, Dhruva experienced -
(i)    incessant tears of bliss      (ánanda-báspa-kalayá)
(ii)    melting of tbe beart       [viklidyamdna-hrdayah)
(iii)    bairs standing on end (pulakdcitdngo)
(iv)     forgetting bis bodily existence {ndtmdnam asmarad)
(v)     freedom from tbe subtle body (mukta-lingah)
L i n k : When one attains liberation from not only the gross body, but also the subtle
body (mukta-lingah),        one is competent and fully prepared to be transferred to the
spiritual     world.
19. Airplane: Dhruva Mahárája then saw a beautiful airplane coming down from tbe
sky, illuminating all directions like tbe full moon.
20. Tbe Lord's associates: I n tbat pláne, Dhruva saw two chief associates of Lord
Visnu - blackish, youthful, four-armed, with reddish lotus eyes, holding clubs,
dressed attractively, wearing belmets, necklaces, bracelets and earrings.
21. Dhruva's bewilderment: Seeing them, Dhruva stood up, but, being bewildered,
be forgót bow to receive them properly. He simply offered respects by folding bis
hands and cbanting tbe holy names.
22. Dhruva's absorption i n K r s n a : Dhruva stood with földed hands, bowing
humbly, absorbed in thinking of Krsna's lotus feet [krsna-pdddbhinivista-cetasam).
23-27: Nanda and Sunanda spoke to Dhruva -
23. Let there be good fortune unto you. When you were five years old you pleased
tbe Lord with your austerities. N o w , please bear us attentively.
Note: What was possible for Dhruva is possible for everyone by proper training in
Krsna consciousness from childhood.
24. We came to take you: We are associates of tbe Supreme Lord, wbo is tbe creator
of all universes (akhila-jagad-dhátur) and tbe bolder of tbe Sárnga bow. We came to
take you to His abode.
25-26. Please reside in Visnu-loka, wbicb is -
(i)    very rare to achieve (sudurjayam)
(ii)    circumambulated by all planets and luminaries
(iii)    attained neither by your forefathers nor anyone else
(iv)     tbe residence of Lord Visnu, bigbest of all
(v)     worshipable by tbe inbabitants of all other planets.
27. Y o u are worthy to board this unique airplane (vimana-pravaram),               which has
been sent by tbe Lord, uttama-sloka, wbo is tbe bead of all living entities        (mauli)."
28-29. Dhruva boards tbe airplane: Hearing these sweet words, Dhruva first took
bath, performed daily rituals, accepted blessings from tbe sages, worshipped and
circumambulated tbe airplane, and offered bis respects to Nanda and Sunanda. He
became effulgent as gold and prepared to board tbe airplane.
Note: As Lord Visnu is worshipable, so are His associates, paraphernalia, airplane
and abode. Everything of Lord Visnu's is as good as Visnu.
30. At tbat time, deatb personified arrived there. D h r u v a placed bis foot on the
head of death and boarded tbe pláne.
31. Drums resounded in tbe sky, Gandharvas sang, and demigods sbowered fiowers.
32. Dhruva remembers Suniti: As tbe pláne was ascending, Dhruva remembered bis
mother (bis patha-pradarsaka guru wbo first instructed bim in achieving tbe Lord's
favour). He thought, " H o w can I go to Vaikuntha leaving bebind my poor mother?"
33. Suniti i n another airplane: Understanding Dhruva's mind, Nanda and Sunanda
showed bim another airplane in wbicb Suniti was also going.
Note A : A glorious son or disciple - A father, mother or guru, although not very
advanced in bhakti, can go to the spiritual world, if he or she has a child or a disciple
who strongly executes devotional service.
Note B: Message to mothers - Taking inspiration from Suniti, every mother should
instruct and train her child to become a devotee of the Supreme Lord.
34. O n tbe way: While being sbowered with fiowers by tbe devatás,                Dhruva saw
many planets on bis way to Dhruvaloka.
35. Tbe pláne reacbes D h r u v a l o k a : Passing through tbe Bbur, Bbuvar and
Svarlokas, tbe airplane finally arrived at Dhruvaloka, tbe residence of Lord Visriu,
beyond tbe planets of tbe seven sages.
Note: Dhruvaloka is situated above the sun, but below Maharloka (Refer 5.23.9).
! 3 6 - 4 0 : G L O R I E S OF DHRUVALOKA   ^^/////
36-37. Who is eligible to attain the Lord's abode? A l l tbe illuminating planets sbine
only due to tbe self-effulgent Vaikuntha planets. Tbey are easily reached by those
wbo are merciful (working for tbe welfare of others), peaceful, equipoised, pure, able
to please everyone, and keeping friendsbips only with tbe Lord's devotees.
sántáh sama-drsah suddháh        sarva-bhütdnuranjanáh
ydnty anjasdcyuta-padam      acyuta-priya-bdndhavdh
5^iV'&'éí''t2t'if't^^                                  4.12 Dhruva Goe.s Back to Godhead
38. Thus Dhruva who was fully Krsria conscious (krsna-parayanah) attained the erest
jewel of the three worlds.
39. The entire zodiac beit circumambulates Dhruvaloka with great speed, just as a
herd of bulls circumambulates a central pole.
40. Nárada sang about tbe glories of Dhruva at tbe sacrifice of tbe Pracetás.
4 1 - 4 3 : NÁRADA M U N I GLORIFIES D H R U V A MAHÁRÁJA
41. Attained the unattainable position: By bis great austerities       (tapah-prabhávah),
Dhruva attained an exalted position, not possible to attain even for strict followers of
tbe Vedas {veda-vddinah), and what to speak of ordinary kings.
Note: They cannot even attain the method by which Dhruva attained the goal, what
to speak of the goal itself.
42. Conquered tbe unconquerable L o r d : Dhruva, aggrieved by bis stepmotber's
barsb words, left for tbe forest at only five years of age. But be managed to conquer
tbe unconquerable Lord with bis devotional qualities (bhakta-gunaih pardjitam).
43. A t a very young age and i n a very short time: Tbe position tbat Dhruva attained
when be was 5-6 years old, in tbe duration of six months, cannot be attained by great
ksatriyas even after many years.
4 4 - 5 2 : PHALA-S'RUTI
44. Devotees like to bear: Tbus I bave explained tbe glorious life of Dhruva, as
asked by you. Great devotees very much like to bear about Dhruva.
45-47. Benefits: Wealth, fame, longevity, beaven, Dhruvaloka, pure bhakti, greatness,
good qualities, power and respect. A l l sins and miseries will be diminished.
48-50: Way of reciting this story: (?) with great attention and care, (ii) in a society
of brdhmanas or other twice-born persons, (iii) without taking remuneration, (iv) by
persons wbo bave taken shelter of tbe Lord, (v) before a favourable audience.
When to recite: In tbe morning and evening, during full moon, dark moon, Dvádasi,
tbe Sravana month, ksaya days, vyatipdti days, at tbe end of a month, or on Sunday.
Resuit of such cbanting: Botb tbe reciter and audience will become perfect.
51. Blessings of tbe demigods: Those wbo out of transcendental kindness give tbis
immortal knowledge to tbe ignorant automatically gain tbe demigods' blessings.
52. Conclusion: Tbus, I bave narrated tbe transcendental activities of tbe pure,
famous Dhruva, wbo as a child, gave up home and toys to take shelter of Lord Visnu.
4 . 1 3 DESCRIPTION O F THE DESCENDANTS
OF DHRUVA MAHÁRÁJA
1-5: Vidura i
inquires about |    6-9: Qualities of Utkala, the eldest son of Dhruva,
and his departure to the forest.
the Pracetas i
10-11: Utkala appears mad, so the ministers crown
6-20:                       his hrother Vatsara as king.
Maitreya
Describes the      12-18: Descendants of Vatsara. The seventh king is
Descendants          Ahga, who leaves home, disgusted at the hac
of Dhruva                     character of his son Vena.
21-24:         19-20: Vena dies hy the curse of angry sages. They
Vidura's             churn his dead hody and Prthu appears.
astonishment
and inquiry        25-30: The priests at the As'vamedha-yajha inform
ahout Vena          King Ahga that the demigods had not appeared,
4.13                         despite correct procedures. The king inquires ahout
any offence on his part.
Description
of the         25-39:
31: The priests inform that the king is sonless due to
Maitreya
Descendants                                     sins in his previous life.
narrates
of Dhruva        events         32-34: The priests suggest to perform a sacrifice to
leading to        please Lord Hari to get a son that will please the
Vena's hirth                           demigods.
35-39: They offer oblations to Visnu, then offer the
páyasam pot to his wife Suníthá (daughter of Mrtyu),
who gives hirth to an irreligious son, Vena.
40-42: Ahga failed to reform his son who would
mercilessly kill animals and playmates. Thus he was
aggrieved.
40-49: Ahga
leaves home       43-47: Ahga's thoughts ahout the son: A had son is
due to Vena's      better than a good son, leading one to detachment.
atrocities                  Thus he went to the forest.
48-49: The ministers search for Ahga hut cannot find i
him. Disappointed, they inform the sages.      |
1^''
tA*
x«Áj;x(i*7.j                          '**A
4.1 i IX'sceniljnls ol' Dhruva Maliaraja
L i n k : Hearing that Narada Muni glorified Dhruva Maháraja            at the sacrifice of the
Pracetás (4.12.41-43), Vidura inquires about the      Pracetás.
1 -5 VIDURA INQUIRES A B O U T T H E PRACETÁS
1. V i d u r a overwhelmed: Hearing about Dhruva's asceut to Lord Visnu's abode,
Vidura was overwhelmed witb devotional emotion aud inquired from Maitreya.
2. " W b o were the Pracetás? T o wbicb family did tbey belong? Wbere was tbe
sacrifice performed?"
3. Nárada is certainly a very exalted personality. He personally saw tbe Lord (deva-
darsanam) and compiled tbe      páhcarátrika-vidhi.
4-5. I am eager to hear: Wbile tbe Pracetás were executing sacrifices for tbe
satisfaction of tbe Lord, Nárada Muni glorified tbe qualities of Dhruva and tbe
pastimes of tbe Supreme Lord. I am very eager to bear tbem.
L i n k : Since    the Pracetás   were born in Dhruva      Mahárája's      dynasty,        Maitreya
describes the descendants of      Dhruva.
5 - 2 0 : MÁITREYA DESCRIBES THE DESCENDANTS OF DHRUVA
6. Utkala didn't accept the throne: After Dhruva departed for tbe forest, bis eldest
son Utkala did not accept tbe opulent throne of bis father.
7-9. Qualities of Utkala
(i) upasántátmá - Peaceful
(ii) nihsangah - Detached
(iii) sama-darsanah - Lquipoised
(iv) dadarsa loke vitatam - Saw tbe Supreme Lord in all jivas
(v) átmánam lokam átmani - Saw tbe jivas in tbe Supreme Lord
(vi) Attained realization of Brahman, wbicb was - peaceful, devoid of argument,
pure knowledge, bliss, and all-pervading.
(vii) Burnt all contaminations by tbe practice of yoga
(viii) Situated in bis constitutional position, seeing only himself and tbe Lord.
10-11. Vatsara became king: Utkala appeared to tbe less intelligent people as foolish,
blind, dumb, deaf and mad, like a fire covered witb asbes. Hence tbe ministers
crowned bis younger brotber, named Vatsara, tbe son of Bhrami, as king.
mmiM.^mMf^m¥mMimm
Tnnlo 4 Ovcrvic-w
12-18: Descendants of Dhruva Mahárája
. Verses    Descendant        Married                        Descendants
12       Vatsara           Svarvithi   2 sons: Pusparna, Tigmaketu, Isa, Orja, Vasú and
Jaya.
13-14     Puspárna          Prabhá      3 sons: Prátar, Madbyandinam and Sáyam
Dosá        3 sons: Pradosa, Nisitba and Vyusta
15       Vyusta            Puskarini   1 Son: Sarvatejá
15-16     Sarvatejá         Áküti       1 son: Cáksusa - became tbe sixtb Manu
15-16     Cáksusa           Nadvalá     12 sons: Puru, Kutsa, Trita, Dyumna, Satyaván,     |
Rta, Vrata, Agnistoma, Atirátra, Pradyumna, Sibi   j
and Ulmuka.
17      Ulmuka            Puskarini   6 sons: Anga, Sumaná, Kbyati, Kratu, Angira and
Gaya.
18      Anga              Sunitbá     1 son: Vena wbo was very crooked.
18. Anga's disgust witb his son: Tbe saintly King Anga, disgusted witb Vena's bad
character, left bome.
19-20. Vena's death and Prthu's b i r t h : Wben angry sages cursed Vena, be died.
After bis deatb, all tbe rogues and tbieves flourisbed, and all tbe citizens suffered
greatly. On seeing tbis, tbe great sages churned tbe rigbt band of Vena, from wbicb
King Prtbu, tbe originál emperor of tbe world {ádyah ksitisvarah), was born as a
portion of Náráyana.
21 -24: VIDURA'S ASTONISHMENT AND INQUIRY A B O U T VENA
21. Bad son to a good king! H o w could sucb a saintly king as Anga, wbo bad bigb
character and was a lover of brabminical culture, get sucb a bad son as Vena?
22. Sages cursing a king! Wby did tbe great sages, conversant witb dharma, tbougb
understanding tbat tbeir act will be sinfui, curse tbe king, wbo carried tbe rod of
punisbment?
23. K i n g disregarded by citizens! A king, even if sinfui, should not be disregarded
by tbe citizens.
24. Please explain: Therefore, I wisb to bear from you tbe activities of King Vena,
since you are knowledgeable of past and future (paravara-vittamah), and I am your
faitbful devotee (sraddadhdndya bhaktdya).
*?7JP3X^^"'>^^7JP€X**-*X€,.'**7.J?,/MNIL*
4.13 Descendants of Dhruva Mahárája
25. Ahga's yajna: Once King Ahga performed an asvamedha-yajna                  in which the
demigods did not appear, despite being invited by expert brdhmanas.
2 6 - 2 8 : The priests Informed King Ahga
26-27. T b e demigods are not accepting oblations in spite of the well coUected and
uncontaminated sacrificiai paraphernalia and proper cbanting of tbe Vedic bymns.
28. We do not find any reason for tbe demigods to feel insulted in any way.
29-30. Hearing tbis, aggrieved Ahga inquired, "Kindly teli me if I bave committed
any offences because of wbicb tbe demigods are not accepting tbeir sbares."
31-34: The head priests said
31. Y o u don't bave a son: Y o u are sinless in tbis life, but due to a sin in your
previous life, you do not bave a son in tbis life.
32. A s k tbe Lord for a son: But, if you pray to tbe Lord asking for a son and
perform sacrifice for tbat purpose, tbe Lord (yajha-bhuk) will fulfil your desire.
33. T h e n the demigods w i l l come: Wben Lord Hari is invited, tbe demigods will
come witb H i m to accept tbeir sbares in tbe sacrifice.
34. L o r d H a r i fulfils the desires for wbicb one worships H i m .
35-36. Páyasam: Tbus for tbe sake of a son for King Ahga, tbe priests offered
oblations to Lord Visnu. Tben a person appeared from tbe fire akar, carrying a
golden pot of pdyasam.
37. Páyasam given to Sunitbá: Witb tbe permission of tbe priests, liberal (uddra-
dhíh) King Ahga took tbe pdyasam pot, smelled it witb delight and offered it to bis
wife Sunitbá (daughter of Mrtyu, deatb personified).
Note: The Lord's arrangement: Sometimes the Lord arranges an unfortunate wife
(like Sunitbá) or a cruel son (like Vena) for His devotee (like Ahga), to increase his
detachment so that he gradually becomes detached from his wife and home to
progress in devotional life.
38-39. Cruel son born to Sunitbá: Sbe drank it and became pregnant, giving birtb to
a son in due course of time. Tbe boy became greatly irreligious, taking tbe qualities of
bis maternal grandfather, Mrtyu.
¥mmB¥mimm:mim
4 0 - 4 9 : A N G A LEAVES H O M E D U E T G VENA'S ATROCITIES
40. Vena's cruelty: Vena would unnecessarily kill innocent animals in the forest and
frighten the citizens by bis presence.
41. Killing playmates: He would kill bis own playmates mercilessly, as if tbey were
animals for slaugbter.
42. Anga's attempts to reform Vena: Anga punished Vena in different ways to
reform bim, but failed. He tbus became greatly aggrieved and tbougbt to himself.
43-36:    Ahga's thoughts about his son
43. "Sonless people are more fortunate for tbey need not suffer tbe unbearable grief
caused by a bad son. Tbey must bave worshipped tbe Lord in tbeir previous lives.
44. A sinfui son vanquisbes one's reputation, and causes irreligion and quarrel wbicb
creates endless anxiety.
45. No one wants such a son: Wbicb intelligent man would desire sucb a son, wbo is
a bond of illusion [moha-bandhanam) and wbo makes one's bome miserable?
46. A bad son is better than a good son, since a good son creates attachment for
bome, but a bad son creates a bellisb bome, by wbicb one easily develops detachment.
47. Anga leaves bome: Witb tbese tbougbts, King Anga became indifferent and
eventually left bome in tbe dead of nigbt towards tbe forest, giving up all attraction
for kingdom and opulence.
48-49. Everyone aggrieved: Understanding tbis, tbe citizens, priests, ministers, etc.
were greatly aggrieved and began searching for Anga, but no one could find bim.
Disappointed, tbey returned to tbe city and informed tbe sages, wbo assembled tbere
due to tbe king's absence.
F í r # ' i r € * i í i *
9zjt3y'*^zy**z33y*é-'C^3y**-*33y^--^
4 . 1 4 T H E STORY O F KING VENA
1-2: For the welfare of the people, the sages enthrone
1-67 Vena's        ' Z        Vena as king, despite the ministers' disapproval.
atrocities
3-6: Vena's pride, cruelty and prohibition of religious
activities.
7-13:
Concerned
The sages thought, "We should try to pacify the king
sages plan to
and if he does not listen then we will destroy him."
meet Vena and
pacify him                 14-16: Follow dharma. That is good for you, otherwise
,     . I        you will fali down from your royal position.     \
14-22: The
saves try
sages ír v to
LU [            17-20: Duty of a pious king is to satisfy the Supreme ~|
'/     p^ify Vena                 ^'^^^ enS^ging everyone in their occupational duties.;
4.14 The
Story of                                       21-22: Qualities of the Supreme Lord. Satisfaction of i
the Lord leads to satisfaction of the demigods.    |
King Vena
23-25: The king is actually the Supreme Lord, your       i
23-28: Vena's i               affection to demigods is like the affection of an       |
arrogant reply s                             unchaste woman.
to sages                    26-28: The king is the reservoir of all demigods
therefore worship me with sacrifice.
29-35: The sages kill Vena. Sunítha preserves his dead body with mantras. I
36-41: The sages observe disturbance in the kingdom
42-46: The sages churn Vena's thigh to produce Bahuka
L i n k : Upon the departure of King Anga, the sages corronated his son Vena as king.
1-6: VENA'S ATROCITIES
1. Sages' concern: The sages, headed by Bbrgu, wbo always tbougbt of tbe welfare of
tbe people (lokdnám     ksema-darsinah),            could see tbat without a ruler people would
stoop to tbe levél of animals (pasu-sdmyatdm,              independent and non-regulated).
2. T b e sages enthrone V e n a : Tbey called tbe Queen, mother Sunitbá, and witb ber
permission enthroned Vena as king, tbougb tbe ministers disagreed.
canto 4 overview                  jí|>SCíB^^^
3. Fearfui thieves: Vena's cruelty was well-known, therefore when thieves heard
about bis coronation, tbey became very mucb afraid and bid themselves.
4. Vena's pride: Wben Vena ascended to tbe throne, be became proud of bis wealth
in all eigbt directions. He considered himself tbe greatest and began insulting great
personalities.
5. Vena's travels: Blind, intoxicated (madándah), proud (utsiktah), and uncontroUed
[nirankusah), be travelled everywbere causing tbe eartb and sky to tremble.
6. Vena prohibits religious acts: Sounding kettledrums throughout tbe countryside,
be forbade all tbe bráhmanas to perform sacrifices, cbarity and religious activities.
7 - 1 3 : CONCERNED SAGES PLAN T G M E E T V E N A AND PACIFY H I M
7. T h e sages' discussion: Seeing Vena's atrocities and considering tbe danger to tbe
people, tbe sages discussed amongst themselves out of compassion.
8. "Tbe people are in danger from botb directions due to (?) an irresponsible king
and [ii) tbieves and rogues. It is like a log witb fire hlazing at botb ends.
9. Fearing a state without a king (ardjaka) and tbe resultant political crisis, we made
unqualified Vena king. But now tbe people are being disturbed by the king himself.
10. Mischievous king: By nature be is very miscbievous because of being born from
Sunitbá. Supporting tbis wicked king is like maintaining a snake witb milk.
11. Let US pacify him: We appointed bim to protect tbe citizens, but now be bas
become tbeir enemy. We should try to pacify bim so tbat bis sins do not affect us.
12. I f needed let us k i l l bim: If be does not accept our advice, we sball burn tbat
sinner to asbes witb our powers. He is already condemned by public criticism."
Note: Saintly people are not interested in political matters, yet they are always
concerned about the welfare of the people in generál.
13. Having tbus decided, tbe sages approached Vena. Concealing tbeir anger, tbey
spoke to pacify bim witb sweet words.
Illlll^^               1 4 - 2 2 : T H E SAGES TRY T O PACIFY V E N A
14. Hear us: "Please bear our good advice attentively. Doing so will increase your life
duration, opulence, strength and fame.
15. Follow dharma: Tbose wbo follow dharma witb words, body, mind and
intelligence become free from miseries (visokdn). Tbus being freed from matériái
influence, tbey achieve liberation (dnantyam).
t2^ifÍA^éÍ'''^l^éf     '^^^                             4.14 The Slory oí King Vena
16. Avoid fali down: Your activities should not be tbe cause of spoiling tbe spiritual
life of your citizens, as tbis will lead to your fali down from tbe royal position.
17- 19: A pious king -
17. Enjoys in both lives: A pious king wbo protects tbe citizens from miscbievous
ministers, tbieves and rouges, can accept taxes and enjoy botb in tbis world and tbe
next.
18- 19. Satisfies tbe L o r d : A pious king in wbose state varnásrama is strictly observed
and wbere all tbe citizens worship tbe Supreme Lord by tbeir occupations, gives
satisfaction to tbe Lord.
20. Wben tbe L o r d is satisfied, wbat is impossible to achieve? [tasmims tuste kim
aprápyam). For tbis reason all tbe demigods and tbe inbabitants of various planets
take pleasure in offering all kinds of paraphernalia for His worship.
21. Tbe Lord is - (?) tbe enjoyer of tbe results of all sacrifices [yajna-sangraham),
(ii) tbe sum totál of tbe tbree Vedas (trayimayam), (iii) tbe owner of all ingredients
for sacrifice (dravyamayam), and (iv) tbe ultimate goal of all austerity (tapomayam).
Therefore, you should direct your citizens to worship tbe Lord tbrougb sacrifices, for
your prosperity.
22. Demigods' satisfaction: Wben tbe demigods, wbo are expansions of tbe Lord,
are satisfied, tbey will give you your desired results. But if you stop tbe sacrifices, you
will disrespect tbe demigods.
2 3 - 2 8 : VENA'S A R R O G A N T REPLY TO THE SAGES
23. Inexperienced: " Y o u are inexperienced (bdlisa). It is regrettable tbat you are
considering adharma to be dharma. Y o u are giving up your real husband (me) and
searching for a paramour (tbe Supreme Lord).
24. T h e king is tbe Supreme L o r d : Tbose wbo, out of ignorance, do not worship tbe
king, wbo is actually tbe Supreme Lord (nrpa-rüpinam              isvaram), experience
happiness neither in tbis world nor tbe next.
25. Unchaste: Your affection for tbe demigods is exactly like tbe affection of an
unchaste woman (kuyositdm) wbo gives up affection to ber husband for a paramour.
26-27. Tbe king is the reservoir of all demigods (sarva-devamayo nrpah): Visnu,
Brahma, Siva, Indra, Váyu, Yama, Ravi, Parjanya (tbe rain god), Kuvera, Soma, tbe
eartb deity, Agni, Varuna, and all others wbo are competent to bestow benedictions
or curses, all reside in tbe body of tbe king.
anto 4 Overview
28. So, worship me with all your offerings and abandon your envy. Wbo except me
is to enjoy tbe first oblations in all tbe sacrifices?"
2 9 - 3 5 : SAGES KILL V E N A
29-30. Vena's nature and Sages' anger: Tbus, Vena wbo -
(i)   developed perverse intelligence (viparyaya-matih),
(ii)    sinned (pápiyán),
(iii)    deviated from tbe rigbt patb (utpatham gatah),
(iv)     lost all good fortune [bhrasta-mangalah)
(v)     tbougbt himself very learned        {pandita-mdniná),
could not accept tbe respectful requests of tbe sages. Feeling broken bearted, tbe
sages became very angry at bim and spoke as follows:
31. " K i l l h i m ! K i l l bim! He is tbe most dreadful (prakrti-ddrunah).   If be lives, be will
quickly turn tbe wbole world to asbes.
Note: Saintly persons are generally kind to everyone, but if the king becomes demonic
(like serpents and scorpions), it is their duty to upset the government and replace it
with deserving persons who follow the instructions of saintly persons.
32-33. T h i s impudent and shameless person, wbo blasphemed Lord Visnu, does not
deserve to sit on tbe throne. Wbo except bim would criticize tbe Lord, by wbose
mercy one gets all fortune and opulence?"
34. Sages k i l l Vena: Vena was as good as dead due to bis blaspbeming tbe Lord
(acyuta-nindayd). N o w , tbe sages, manifesting tbeir covert anger, without any
weapons killed Vena simply by angry words (hunkrtair).
35. Vena's dead body preserved: After tbe sages left, Vena's mother Sunitbá, being
aggrieved, preserved bis dead body witb special ingredients and mantras.
3 6 - 4 1 : T H E SAGES OBSERVE DISTURBANCES IN THE^ K I N G D O M
36. Sages assemble: Once, tbe sages assembled on tbe bank of tbe river Sarasvatí and
began to discuss about transcendental subject matters.
37. Sages' concern: Observing various disturbances in tbe country, tbey considered
tbat misfortune may befall tbe people due to tbieves in tbe absence of a king.
38. Dust storm: Wbile tbus discussing, tbey saw a great dust storm, caused by
running tbieves and rogues, wbo were plundering tbe citizens.
i*A"#'A'l*A'*^*íl^^^^^
^JtTA't2r^^                                     4.14 •[ lic Sl()i\ 39-40. Plunderers: The sages understood the dust storm to be caused by an uprising
of plunderers, wbo were taking advantage of a kingless state. Altbougb tbe powerful
sages could subdue tbem, tbey considered it improper on tbeir part to do so.
41. T h e sages thought, "Altbougb a hrdhmana is peaceful and equipoised, still be
should not neglect pure bumans. Sucb neglect w i l l diminisb his spiritual power just
as water kept in a cracked pot leaks out."
42. Ahga's dynasty should continue: Tbus tbe sages decided tbat tbe dynasty of
saintly Ahga should not be stopped, as in bis dynasty, tbe kings were of unfailing
strength (amogha-virydh) and prone to become devotees of tbe Lord (kesavdsraydh).
Note: The purity of hereditary, seminal succession in twice-born families is called
amogha-virydh. This purity is because of observing samskdras or purificatory
processes. Mahárája Ahga was very pure, coming in the seminal succession of Dhruva
Mahárája. But his semen was contaminated hy the association of his wife, Suníthá,
the daughter of death personified, due to which wicked Vena was born. However, the
ingredients by which another hody could he produced were there in Vena's hody. The
sages knew the method of producing another hody from it.
43-44. Bábuka's birth: Tbus tbey churned tbe tbigbs of Vena's dead body in a
specific method and a dwarf-like person named Bábuka was born. He was blackish,
sbort, witb sbort limbs, large jaws, a fiat nose, reddish eyes and copper-coloured bair.
45. Father of Naisáda race: He submissively bowed down and asked, "Sirs, wbat
sball I do?" Tbe sages replied, "Please sit (nisida)." Tbus be became tbe father of tbe
Naisáda lace.
46. Sinfui descendants: Because of accepting tbe terrible sins of Vena on being born,
Naisáda's descendants are always engaged in sinfui activities and reside in tbe bilis
and forests.
Note: Vena's body was produced from both Anga and Suníthá. The impure portion
of Vena's body resulting from Suníthá was separated by the sages in the form of
degraded Bábuka. Now the pure portion of Vena's body, resulting from saintly Anga,
will give birth to Mahárája Prthu.
Canto 4 Overview
4 . 1 5 KING PRTHU'S APPEARANCE AND C O R O N A T I O N
1-2: After churning the two arms of king
Vena, a male and female appear.
1-10:             2-6: Sages spoke, "Prthu and Arci are
Appearance of        partial representations of the Lord and His
Prthu and Arci                  eternal consort Laksmi.
7-10: The demigods celebrate Prthu's
appearance, Brahma confirms that Prthu is
the Lord's partial representation.
4.15 King
Prthu's                                         11-13: Paraphernalia, presentations and
11-20:                         Prthu's splendour
Appearance                 Coronation of
and                        Prthu             14-20: Various personalities offer gifts to
Coronation                                                      King Prthu
21-22:1 haven't displayed these qualities. |
Your words shouldn't go in vain.
21-26: Pfthu
23: Glorify me in future, when I exhibit
humbly
them, in my absence. Offer prayers to the
dissuades the
Lord, not me.
bards
24-26: Such praise could be an insult or
criticism. I am not famous now.
1 -10: APPEARANCE O F P R T H U AND A R C I
1. C h u r n i n g the arms: The sages then churned the two arms of King Vena's dead
body from wbicb a male and female couple {mithunarh) appeared.
2. Divine Couple: Tbe learned sages were pleased to see tbe couple. Tbey understood
tbat an empowered expansion of Lord Visnu [saktyavesa) bad appeared. Tbus tbey
spoke.
¥mmmmmmzmMmmf¥m                                                                                   '**i
'l^ÍÍ     *?*A' 'Ő*ÍÍ           *?*l(i          4.15 King Prthu's Appearance and Coronation
3-6: Sages speak about Prthu and Arci
3. Prthu and A r c i : "The male (Prthu) is a plenary expansion of the power of Visnu
who maintains the world (bhuvana-pdlim). The female (Arci) is a plenary expansion
of Laksmi, who is never separated from the Lord.
4. Prthu - will be tbe first among kings {prathamo rdjndm) and His reputation will
expand widely [prthu-sravdh).
5. A r c i - endowed witb heauty tbat beautifies tbe ornaments sbe wears, will accept
King Prtbu as ber husband.
6. T h e Lord and Sri appeared: Tbe Lord bas appeared as King Prtbu to protect tbe
people of tbe world. Sri, tbe Lord's constant companion, bas partially incarnated as
Arci to become King Prthu's queen."
7-10: Jubilation of Prthu's appearance
7. Praises: At tbat time - tbe brdhmanas praised King Prtbu, Gandharvas sang His
glories, Siddhas sbowered fiowers, and Apsarás danced in ecstasy.
8. Auspicious sounds: Concbes, bugles, drums and kettledrums vibrated in outer
space. Great sages, forefathers and personalities from tbe heavenly planets arrived.
9-10. Brahmá's conclusion: Lord Brahma arrived tbere along witb tbe demigods.
Seeing tbe marks of tbe club on King Prthu's rigbt band and tbe lotus on His feet.
Lord Brahma could understand tbat King Prtbu was tbe Lord's partial representation.
Note: Before accepting someone as an incarnation of God, one should verify his
identity according to the symptoms mentioned in the sdstras.
^lllJ|1-20: C O R O N A T I O N OF PRTHU
11. Paraphernalia: Tbe learned brdhmanas tben arranged for King                  Prthu's
coronation. People coUected different paraphernalia for tbe ceremony.
12. Presentations: A l l tbe rivers, seas, bilis, mountains, serpents, cows, birds,
animals, tbe sky, tbe eartb and all living entities coUected various presentations, to
offer tbe king.
13. Prthu's splendour: King Prtbu was exquisitely dressed and coronated
[abhisiktah). Together witb bis well-ornamented wife Arci, tbey appeared exactly like
fire.
Canto 4 Overv ic
14-20: Various Personalities Offer Gifts to King Prthu
Personalities           Gifts offered
14    Kuvera                  Golden royal throne
Varuna                   Umbrella (sprayed fine water particles, brilliant like moon)
15    Váyu                    Two camaras
Dharma                  Flower Garland wbicb would expand His fame
Indra                   Excellent crown
Yama                    Scepter (punishing rod) to rule tbe world
16    Brahmá                  Armour made of spiritual knowledge
Sarasvatí               Transcendental necklace
Lord Hari               Sudarsana cakra
Laksmi                  Imperisbable opulences
17    Lord Siva               Sword marked witb 10 moons
Durgá                   Sbield marked witb 100 moons
Soma                    Horses made of nectar
Visvakarmá              Beautiful chariot
18    Agni                    Bow made of tbe borns of goats and cows
Sürya                   Arrows as brilliant as sunsbine
Bhümi                   Slippers witb magic power
Demigods                Flowers again and again
19    Khecaráh                Dráma, singing, music and tbe power to disappear
Sages                   Infallible blessings
Ocean                   Conch
20    Seas, Mountains,        Patb for bis chariot
Rivers
Bards                   Prayers and praises
2 1 - 2 6 : PRTHU HUMBLY DissyAB££JÜ.LPAi:DÍ,
21. Prthu's grave speech: Seeing tbe professional bards (tbe süta, mdgadha and
vandt) praise bim, tbe greatly powerful Prtbu smiled and witb tbe gravity of
thundering clouds (megha-nirhrddayd) spoke as follows:
22a. I haven't yet displayed tbe qualities: " O gentle süta, mdgadha and vandt, bow
can tbese qualities be directed to me as I bave not yet displayed tbem?"
L i n k : The bards might say, "What fault is there if ive praise you?"
m¥BMmmfmB¥^m¥¥m¥:                                                                              AJ*
**7. f »*7MT33.;^**~. B'_>^%»v^
22b. Y o u r words shouldn't go in vain: " I f I do not display these qualities, your
words will go in vain (and you will incur sins), so it is better that they be offered to
someone else."
L i n k : "All these qualities will become manifest in the   future."
23a. " T h e n glorify me in the future wben I exhibit tbose qualities (in my absence)."
L i n k : "What should we do? Inspired by the assembly we have begun to glorify   you."
23h. Offer prayers to tbe L o r d : "Tbe gentle should offer prayers to tbe Lord and
not to a low buman like me."
L i n k : "But you are the Supreme Lord, worthy of praise."
24. Praise as insult: " H o w can a person allow bis followers to praise bim for bis
future qualities and activities? Sucb praise is simply cbeating, or an insult.
25. Praise as criticism: "Saintly, modest and magnanimous persons, do not like to
bear themselves praised. Tbey consider it a criticism of tbeir abilities.
26. I am not famous now: "Rigbt now I am not very famous for my personal
activities. Therefore, bow could I engage you in praising me for tbose activities?"
Canto 4 Overview
4 . 1 6 PRAISE O F KING PRTHU BY THE
PROFESSIONAL RECITERS
Pleased by Prthu's humility, the
bards continued to praise him for
1-3: The Bards glorify
they - (i) have a taste for glorifying i
Prthu Mahárája
his activities and (ii) were
encouraged hy the sages.
4 . 1 6 Praise of
King Prthu by
4-5: Prthu upholds dharma and actsj
tlie                                                        like demigods
Professional
Reciters                                               6-14: Prthu's actions compared
4-21: King Prthu                      with demigods
manifests the qualities of
demigods.                 15-19: Various qualities of King
Prthu
20-21: Prediction of Pfthu's future
activities.
L i n k : Even after the humble chastisement of King Prthu, the professional               bards
continued to glorify him.
1. T h e bards were very pleased by the humility of King Prthu's nectarean speech
{tad-vág-amrta-sevayd). They continued to praise him, as instructed by tbe sages.
Note: From the instructions of the great sages, the bards understood that King Prthu
was an incarnation of God. Prthu was smiiing and was in a pleasant mood (4.15.21)
while speaking to the bards. This inspired them to praise him further.
2. " I t is not possible for us to glorify you, wbo are an incarnation of tbe Lord and
bave appeared out of causeless mercy [avatatára mdyayd). Lven great orators like
Brahma and tbe demigods cannot actually describe your glorious activities.
j%                  4.16 Praise of King Prthu
3. Nonetheless, we w i l l glorify you, who are a saktyávesa-avatára      and whose
pastimes are ever laudable (slághydni), because - (?) we bave a taste for glorifying
your activities (kathdmrtddrtdh) and (ii) we bave been encouraged by tbe sages.
4. Prthu as the upholder of Dharma
esa dharma-bhrtdm srestho            Best among tbe followers of dharma
lokam dharme 'nuvartayan             Engages everyone in following dharma
goptd ca     dharma-setündm         Give all protection to dharma
sdstd tat-paripanthindm            Chastises tbose wbo oppose dharma
5. Prtbu w i l l act like different demigods in tbeir departmental activities to maintain
tbe living entities. Tbus be will maintain - (?) tbe upper planets by inducing people to
perform sacrifices and (ii) tbe earthly planet by discharging rainfall.
6 - 1 4 : Prthu functioning as various demigods
Demigod           Function                    Prthu Mahárája will...
Sürya             Evaporates water for        Exact taxes from the citizens and
eigbt months and            releases them in times of need.
releases water for four
months in tbe
monsoon.
7     Bbumi             Tolerates                   Out of bis causeless mercy, be forgetful
and forgiving even to persons wbo
trample over bis bead.
8     Indra             Supplies Rain               Supply rain wben tbere is no rainfall
and protect tbe citizens from drougbt.
9     Candra            Pleases tbe world witb      Please tbe world witb bis affectionate
bis cooling rays            glances and charming smiles.
10     Varuna            Glorious and bides          Keep bis policies, activities, methods of
valuables                   success, and treasury confidential.
Visnu             Glorious                    Have tbe greatness, qualities and chief
influence of Visnu.
11     Agni              Powerful                    Be unapproacbable, unbearable and
unconquerable to bis enemies.
Canto 4 Overview                                 fii'A'^fi* A"*A*"Í!Í^^^^
'*$A^3^é^(yJ€A£y~;3^
12   Vayu                                     All pervading                             See the actions of all beings internally           ',
and externally, tbrougb bis spies.
Neutral                                   Be neutral to praise and blaspbemy.
íSitiiated in)                          Tmnartial                                  Be neutral to either his own son
1 d l L LI.CI LV^VJ. 1 1 1 /             X l l l L/dJ. L l A l
Dharma                                                                             (punishing if misbehaving) or tbe son of
an enemy (releasing if innocent).
14   Sun                                      Unimpeded and never-                      Have unimpeded and never-separated
separated sunshine                        influence up to Manasottara Mountain.
15-19: QUALITIES O F K I N G P R T H U
15    jxun/uyisyuii                                                      A of"i\7it"!PC \rf*r\T
ZACLlVlLlCo            T^lpíicino'
VCiy piCdolilg   iKJtr\   illlllLlaminnc
UilCtr\f^           r\T Tnf
\JL LllC
* * 7 / 7 * 7 / T - f/7   *í f/7 * 7 / 7 / 7 í M                   citizens wbo gladly call bim raja.
fflUfl'Lf~ 1 UrlJUriUKUtrl'
16    uTunu-Vrulun                                                       jriXCU.   111 lila VUWb
1 1 LlC LKJ Illa ^idiiiiau.
-
UTunftTunyo                                                        IxCaUCCLlUl           l-/"\1/1
12 í i o t^íi/^t"rn 1 LO        UrttnUrtUb
t-wd 1/14/4/1 d4/1 d c
VTUUnU-btVUKUn                                              Rpndpnno" Gpr\riíT* tn OIHOTQ
IVCllLlCilll^    aU-l V 1L_V, LO L.IUL.I a
r* d 4A d 4jtf\ \ d Z-t c d 4^4 \ d Zt Zt-t i -p d 44 d 4/fd1 rorector or aii ucings
Sut anyán SuTVu-onuiunufrl
rnutiauun                                                   Rf»cr\fr'tfiil
±\.cajJCL.Li Lii nf
KJíL pvorvnnf
cVCl yuiiic
dina-vatsalah                                                      K-incI to tne sutíering
17    4/4/4 d -f- V t/4 L4 d t/t ^4 1/4 -t-t d 44 d 4-^4441C4rearing
i                         otner women as nis own motner
maTV-OnUKlln puVu-STTtSU
patnyám ardha ivátmanah                                            Affectionate to wife as if sbe were half bis body
prajásu pitrvat snigdhah                                           Affectionate like a father to tbe citizens
kinkaro                       brahma-vádindm                       Servant of tbe devotees wbo preacb tbe Lord's
glories
18    dehindm dtmavat-presthah                                           Considering all beings as himself
suhrddfh nandi-vardhanah                                           Increasing joy for bis friends
mukta-sanga-prasango 'yam                                          Intimately associating witb liberated persons
danda-pdnir asddhusu                                               Punisber of tbe wicked
19    kalaydvatirnah                                                     Tbe Lord's saktydvesa-avatdra
try-adhisah                                                        Master of tbe tbree worlds
küta-stha                                                          Changeless
avidyd-racitarh nirarthakarh                                       Seeing all matériái varieties as meaningless.
•
pasyanti                                                           because tbeir basic principle is nescience.
L
4.16 Praise of King Prthu
20-27: ^ ^ ^ • ^ ^ ^ J " J J ^ " p ^ J " ^ J " " ^ ^
20-21, T r a v e l s : This uniquely powerful king will travel on his victorious chariot with
his invincible bow, all around tbe globe exactly like tbe sun. A l l kings and demigods
will offer bim presentations and tbeir wives will glorify bim, considering bim tbe
originál king, wbo carries in bis hands tbe emblems of tbe club and disc.
L i n k : How the women glorified Prthu is described in the next four verses.
22. M i l k i n g the E a r t h : "Being an extraordinary king (adhirdjdh), equal to a
Prajápati, be will milk tbe eartb as a cow, for tbe living facility of all citizens. He will
levél tbe surface of tbe eartb witb bis bow, breaking all tbe bilis, like Indra.
23. T e r r i f y i n g the thieves: A l l demoniac rogues and tbieves will bide themselves
wben tbe lion-like King Prtbu travels over bis kingdom, vibrating tbe string of bis
bow.
24. Sacrifices: He will perform one hundred asvamedha sacrifices and Indra will
steal tbe sacrificiai borsé in tbe bundredtb sacrifice.
25. Meeting the Kumáras: He will meet Sanat-kumára, worship bim witb devotion
and receive spotless knowledge by wbicb one can enjoy transcendental bliss.
26. Widespread fame: Tbus King Prtbu will always bear about himself and bis
uniquely powerful activities wherever be goes.
27. Glorification by everyone: Witb unchecked power be will conquer tbe world
and eradicate tbe threefold miseries of tbe citizens. Botb tbe suras and asuras will
glorify bim.
Canto 4 Overview
ZA
1-2: Prthu offers gifts and respects to all and
i 1-8: Vidura's further L                          satisfies them
inquiries
3-7: Vidura inquires ahout Prthu
I      9-11: Hungry citizens approach Prthu and
suhmit their petition
9-17: King Prthu             12-13: Prthu contemplates and decides to attack:
chases the earth in the 1                           earth                      i
form of a cow                14: Earth ran in the form of a cow out of fear
15-17: Angry Prthu chases the earth
everywhere. Finally she turns to him
4.17
18: You are a knower of dharma and shelter of
Mahárája                                                      the surrendered
Prthu        18-21: Earth's reasons y
not to be killed               19-21: You are merciful. I am a poor, sinless
Becomes
woman who protects all from drowning in the
Angry at                                                    Garhhodaka waters
the Earth
j22-24: Despite accepting your share, you didn't;
reciptocate                 \
22-27: Prthu's
counter-arguments to        i 25: [ will cut you to pieces and feed my citizens;
the earth
26: A king may kill a cruel person
27: You are a falsé, proud and insane cow
28-29:1 am part and parcel of you
30: Being the creator, how can you kill me?
| 3 1 : Now, you are the maintainer (not destroyer)
28-36: The earth
32-33: You have inconceivahle plans and
offers prayers to                          contrary energies
pacify Prthu
34-35:1 am not nourishing your progeny to
rectify them of evil ways
36: If you kill me, charitahle persons will lose
fame
^mB¥mmB¥múmmzimm
4.17 Mahárája Prthu Becomes Angry at the Earth
1 - 8 : VIDURA'S FURTHER INQUIRIES
1. Prthu satisfies the bards: After being glorified by the bards, Prthu satisfied them
with gifts, worshipped them and glorified them.
2. Prthu respects everyone: He offered his respects to the leaders of the bráhmanas
and other castes, his servants, ministers, priests, citizens, admirers and others.
3-7: Vidura's questions to Maitreya about Prthu                    Answered in
3     Why did the earth take the form of a cow?                    4.17.9-4.18.11
Who became the calf and what was the milking pot             4.18.12-28
while Prthu was milking the earth?
How did Prthu make the uneven earth fiat?                    4.18.29-32      ^
Why did Indra steal the sacrificiai horse?                   4.19            ^
5     What destination did Prthu attain after receiving jnana      4.22.1-4.23.18
and vijndna from Sanat-kumára?
6-7   Narrate all the glorious topics of King Prthu which are      4.17.9-4.23
very pleasing to hear (su-sravasah) and produce all good
fortune (punya).
8. Maitreya begins to answer: Being inspired and pleased with Vidura's inquiries
about the Lord's topics, Maitreya praised Vidura and spoke as follows:
9. T h e citizens approach P r t h u : After being enthroned, King Prthu, the protector of
the citizens, was approached hy the suffering citizens who were starving due to
scarcity of food grains. They informed him of their situation as follows:
10-11. " W e are suffering from great hunger and have come to take shelter of you
who are - (?) a worthy shelter (saranyam), (ii) the master of our livelihood (vrtti-
karah patir nah) and (iii) the protector of the citizens (toka-pdlah). Therefore, please
arrange to satisfy our hunger."
12. P r t h u contemplates: Hearing the citizens' lamentation, King Prthu contemplated
for a long time and discovered the reason.
L i n k : Prthu concluded that the earth was not producing sufficient food grains.
13. Prthu's anger at the earth: Concluding like this, the king hecame angry like Lord
Siva, took his how, and aimed an arrow at the earth.
ODIOU201©OUÍCÍ9^
Canto 4 Overview
^Mi¥dfimi0BMw:m:mm
14. T h e earth's fear: Seeing King Prthu with his raised how, the earth trembied out
of fear and taking the form of a cow, ran away like a deer pursued by a hunter.
15-16. Prthu chases the earth: Seeing this, Mahárája Prthu became very angry and
•^hased the cow-shaped earth wherever she fled in the outer space. The earth saw the
king with his raised bow behind her at all places.
1^' T h e earth's helplessness: Just as a man cannot escape death, the earth could not
escape Prthu. Then, she turnéd to him in helplessness.
|HHk                 1 8 - 2 1 : EARTH'S REASONS N O T T Ő B E KILLED            ÜIII
You should not kill me. Because...
18    You are the knower of religious principles (dharma-jna)
You are the shelter of the surrendered (apanna-vatsala)
You are a king and should protect all living entities.
! 19   I am a poor person (dindm)
I have not committed any sins (akrta-kilbisdm)
How can a dharma-jna like you kill a woman?
20    No one strikes even a sinfui woman - what to speak of you who are so merciful
and affectionate to the poor.
I 21   I am like a strong boát on which the whole world stands. If you break me to
pieces how will you stop everyone from drowning (in the Garhhodaka ocean)?
2 2 - 2 7 : PRTHU'S COUNTER-ARGUMENTS T O THE EARTH
Link 19 -> 22-24: Prthu countered the earth's argument, "I have not committed sins.'
22     You have disoheyed my orders
Though you accepted your share of the yajnas, in return you have not
produced sufficient food grains.
23     Although you eat grass daily, you are not filling your milk hag. Therefore,
punishing such an offender is not unsuitable.
24     You foolishly do not deliver the seeds of plants formerly created by Brahmá,
which are now hidden within you.
Link: 19      25: "How can you kill a cow? How can you feed them cow meat?'
Bm£mmmmB¥imB¥mBm\Mmm.
4.17 Maháraja Prthu Becomes Angry at the Earth
25      I shall cut you and with your flesh pacify the hunger-stricken citizens.^
Link 20       26: You have said that I cannot kill a woman.
26      A king may kill a cruel person (man, woman, or eunuch) who is interested only
in self-maintenance (dtma-sambhávanah) and is merciless (niranukrosah). That
is not actually considered killing.
Link 21 —> 27: You have said, "How will you hold them up in the water?"
27      You are a falsé, proud and insane cow. I shall cut you into small pieces, and I
w i l l support the entire population by my mystic powers."
28. E a r t h surrenders: After hearing angry Prthu Mahárája, who was like death
personified, the earth hegan to tremble and she surrendered. With földed hands, she
spoke as follows:
Link:    The   earth   could   understand     that Prthu    Mahdrdja    was    the   empowered
incarnation    of the Supreme Lord.       In order to pacify his anger, she now        presents
herself as a part and parcel of the Lord's gigantic universal       form.
29. " I offer respects to Y o u , the transcendental L o r d , who -
(i) expand in many forms and species (including me) by Your matériái energy,
(ii) as the universal form are composed of the gunas {gundtmane),
(iii) always remain transcendental    (svarüpdnubhava),
(iv)   are unaffected hy the waves of matériái existence (nirdhuta           vibhramormaye).
L i n k : Prthu might say, "If that is so, then according to your own words, I have no
attachment for you. Thus I can kill you."
30. " Y o u , the independent Lord (svardt), have created me, the resting place of all
living entities. And now you are trying to kill me! Other than Y o u , who can he my
shelter? (One should not kill a creeper which has been planted by one's own hand.)"
L i n k : Prthu might say, "The world is made by me and destroyed by me."
31. " Y o u created all living entities by Your inconceivable (avitarkyayd) energy and
You are now maintaining and protecting them. Y o u are also a strict follower of
dharma (dharma-para), so how can Y o u be so anxious to kill me (a cow)?"
^ Note: If there is an acute shortage of food, the dried-up cow may be utilized to feed
the hungry masses of people, but the maintenance of slaughterhouses for the
satisfaction of the tongue should never be sanctioned by a government.
L i n k : Prthu might say, "Are you saying that I am    irreligious?"
32. N o . But Y o u r activities (or plan) cannot be understood by persons bewildered
by maya. Y o u are one, but by Your inconceivable potencies, You have expanded
Yourself into many forms and caused this universe to be created through Brahmá.
33. T h e Lord's energies: Therefore, I offer my respects to Y o u , who create, maintain
and dissolve the universe by Your energies of ahahkára, intelligence, bodies, senses
and sense devatás.     You possess great (samunnaddha) but mutually contrary
(niruddha) energies (preserving and destroying energies).
34-35. Dharádhara: I n the form of Varába, Y o u rescued me from the Garhhodaka
waters. Now, in the form of a great hero you desire to kill me, although I am just like
a boát holding everything afloat.
Note: The earth is arguing like this, "Your progeny were my children, situated in my
lap, and I nourish them with milk. Seeing their evil ways, I have not supplied milk to
rectify them. You, the master of the house, are now trying to punish me for this!"
3 6 . 1 am bewildered hy Y o u r activities. After all I am also a creation of one of Your
energies, consisting of the three gunas. I offer my respects to Y o u , the bringer of
fame to those celebrated for charity. (If you are not merciful to me, then the fame of
charitahle persons will be lost.)
t^éí     '@^lí *A*l(i' '*A*ÍÍ *A*líí                 4.18 Prthu Mahárája Milks the Earth Planet
f     1-2: Seeing Prthu still not satisfied, the earth
\                        spoke
/ j3-5: By following prescribed methods, anyone can
1-11: The earth          :      achieve desired results, not otherwise
advises Prthu on the
method to milk her       i 6-7: Earth explains the reason behind hiding seeds
8-10: Take the seeds out by the standard method
4.18 Prthu                                         11: Make me leve! to conserve the rain water
Mahárája                                     i 12: Prthu made Sváyambhuva Manu the calf and
Milks the                                   : milked all the herbs and grains into his hands (cup)
Earth            12-28: Prthu and                13-27: Others followed Prthu and achieved
Planet          others milk the earth              respective desirables by milking the earth
28: Pfthu developed affection for earth as
L           ^          daughter
29-32: Establishment I
Prthu made the earth fiat and founded towns,
of planned cities by f
cities etc and cared for citizens as a father.
Prthu
1. Prthu unsatisfied: Prthu was still not pacified hy the prayers of the earth and his
lips trembied in great anger. The frightened earth made up her mind and spoke.
2. Seeking the essence: "Please control your anger and hear patiently what I say. I
may be very poor, but a learned man takes the essence of knowledge from all places
like a bumblebee.
3. Prescribed methods: Tbe great sages bave prescribed proper methods by which
people can attain prosperity in tbis life and tbe next.
4. Resuit of following: By faithfully following sucb methods, even an inexperienced
person can easily attain bis desired results.
5. Resuit of ignoring: But, if a foolish person ignores sucb methods and acts
independently, be will remain repeatedly unsuccessful.
^^^H          ' C a n t o 4 Overview      •2í''íí^t2í'Íllfi» ^
^ H H H i                                         ^!iyllzil!^(y-\lié3y^''íc'^-zl2é^^^
6-7. Reasons for the earth's hiding the seeds meant for sacrifice -
(í) A l l the seeds, herbs and grains [osadhih) are being used by nondevotees
devoid of spiritual activities {asadbhih and adhrta-vrataih).
(ii) I am not being properly protected and respected by tbe kings (like you).
Note A: With Vena in mind, the earth also scolds his son, Prthu. She was: (?) apálita
- unprotected because no sacrifices were being performed, (?'?') anádrta - not
respected because of the spread of irreligion.
Note B: When Vena died, the place became filled with thieves. She devoured all the
herbs and grains so that sacrifices may be started by Prthu in the future.
8. T a k e the seeds out: A l l the grain seeds have been stored within me for a long time.
Therefore you should immediately retrieve them by the standard method [yogena
drstena) prescribed by the ácáryas and sástras, and which I will explain to you.
Note: The word ksina in this verse has been explained by Srila Prabhupada as
"deterioration" and by Srila Visvanátha Cakravarti Thákura as "subtle state."
9-10. Standard Method: If you desire to relieve the living entities with sufficient
food, you should make arrangements for (?) a calf suitable for this purpose (vatsam),
(ii) a pot (dohanam) and (???) a milkman (dogdháram).           Being very affectionate
towards the calf, I will produce the desired milk suitable for the living beings.
11. Make me levél so that the rain water coming by Indra's grace will remain on the
surface even after the rainy season has passed (this will keep the earth always moist).
This will be auspicious for all kinds of food production.
12. Prthu satisfied: After hearing the pleasing (priyam) and beneficial (hitam) words
of the earth, the king accepted them. He made Sváyambhuva Manu the calf and
milked all the herbs and grains into his own hands.
13. Others' milking: Other intelligent persons also took the essence out of the earth,
following in the footsteps of Prthu and obtaining whatever they desired.
Note: The earth is called Vasundhará because she holds all wealth (vasú = wealth,
dhará = one who holds). Thus everyone regained from her the items they had lost in
the absence of dharma, during the reign of Vena, and afterwards when there was no
king. The following table shows what various persons obtained from the earth.
Milkman               Calf                  Pot                 Milk
12   Prthu                 Sváyambhuva Manu      Hands               Herbs and grains
14   Sages                 Brhaspati             Senses              Vedic hymns               i
4.18 Prthu Mahárája Milks the Earth Pianet
15    Demigods                             Indra                   Golden pot         Soma (nectar)
16    Daitvas                              Prahláda                Iron not           Lioiior
AA VJXX   LJVJl.
17    Gandharvas and
1—'Visvávasu               Lotus flower       Musical art and heauty
Apsarás
18    Pitarah                              Aryamá                  Unhaked            Kavya (food offered to
earthen pot        the ancestors)
19  Siddhas                                Kaoila                  Sky                Siddhis
C—' X V.* X_* XX XX kJ               X ^ X-X L J X X XX                         XJ X XX XX X X X kJ
Vidyádharas                            Kapila                  Sky                The art of flying
L\j Jviinp u ru sa s                       iviaya                                     íviysLic power or
ni^iíinnparinp íit will
\~lASaLJLJ\./71                                         Rúdra                   Skull              RpTTpi-op-pc    míinp of nlonn
AiX
V C>1           l l l d U l ^   vjl   ty i t J V J v l
Bhütas, Pisácas
22    Snakes and                           Taksaka                 Snake holes/       Poison
kJXXVXXX.X-'kJ XXXXXHX
scorpions                                                    mouths
23    Cattle                               Nandi                   Forest             Grass
24    Carnivores                           Lion                    Forest             Flesh
Birds                                Garuda                  Stomachs           Insects and fruits
25    Trees                                Banyán tree                                Delicious juices
Mountains                            Himalayas               Peaks of hills     Minerals
26-27. T h e earth supplies everyone: In this way King Prthu and all others (not
mentioned above) created different types of calves and milked out their respective
desirables. Thus planet earth supplied everyone their respective food.
28. Prthu's daughter earth: King Prthu was very satisfied with the earth. Thus, he
developed affection for her as if she were his own daughter.
^ ^                  2 9 - 3 2 : ESTABLISHMENT O F PLANNED CITIES BY K I N G P R T H U
29. Prthu makes the earth fiat: After this, powerful Prthu made the earth almost fiat
by breaking up the hills with the strength of his bow.
30. Prthu and citizens: For all the citizens of the state, King Prthu (?) was as good as
a father, (ii) supplied proper subsistence and (iii) made suitable residences.
3 1 - 3 2 : Prthu's planning of cities and villages -
31. He founded many villages, towns, cities, forts, residences for cowherdsmen,
cowsheds, military camps, mines, agricultural towns and mountain villages.
32. Town and city planning began from the time of King Prthu. Before that people
lived here and there, without fear and according to their own convenience.
Canto 4 Overview
1-2: Prthu's yajnas and Indra's intolerance
1-9: Performance
3-6: Lord Visnu and many other exalted
of Asvamedha-
personalities attended the sacrifice
yajnas by Prthu
7-9: Various gifts offered in the sacrifice |
10-12: Indra steals the horse
4.19 King
13-18: Prthu's son (VijitasVa) brings back
Prthu's          10-25: Indra steals                          the horse
One           the sacrificiai horse
Hundred              and creates
19-21: Indra again steals the horse
heretics
Horse
Sacrifices                                       22-25: Resuit of Indra's falsé sannyasí
attires
26-29: Priests dissuade Prthu and prepare I
themselves to forcefully offer Indra in the
sacrifice
30-31: Brahmá's appearance and his
26-42: Lord                     reasons for not killing Indra
Brahma appears
on the scene to               32-38: Brahmá to Pfthu: No need to
dissuade Prthu               perform more sacrifices. Give up your
and the priests            anger. Accept the supreme will and avoid
from killing Indra          the spreading of irreligion. Remember the
purpose of your incarnation.
39-42: Prthu sacrifices his ambition of
performing the 100* yajna. Lveryone
assembled was satisfied.
f^ljk^tflTáJ^tfj^ .ifjTiíTtg^i 'tyi             4.19 King Prthu's One I iun.iied I luise S.u rifii i-s
1 . Prthu's yajnas: King Prthu initiated the performance of 100 asvamedha-yajnas at
Manu's piacé caiied Brahmávarta, where the Sarasvatí River fiows towards the east.
2. Indra's intolerance: Indra couid not toierate these great sacrifices of Prthu,
thinking that King Prthu wouid excei him.
3-9: How Prthu's sacrifice excelled indra's sacrifice
3-4. Visnu's personal presence: I n Prthu's sacrifices. Lord Visnu, who is - yajna-
patih (the master of sacrifice), bhagavdn, harir, isvarah (the Supreme controiier),
sarvdtmd (the Supersoui of everyone), sarva-loka-guruh (the teacher of the universe),
and prabhu (the proprietor of aii planets) - was personally present. Brahmá, Siva,
other demigods and their foiiowers came along with H i m . Upon His appearance, the
Gandharvas, Apsarás and great sages praised H i m .
5-6. Other exalted personalities: The Lord was accompanied by the Siddhas,
Vidyádharas, Daityas, Dánavas, Yaksas, H i s chief associates Sunanda and Nanda,
Kapila, Nárada, Dattátreya, and the Kumáras, who were aii always eager to sérve
(sevanotsukáh) the Lord.
7-9. Various gifts were offered in that sacrifice:
(i) E a r t h supplied aii desired objects Üke the miik-producing kdma-dhenu.
(ii) Rivers supplied aii kinds of tastes.
(iii)   Trees produced aii types of honey and fruits.
(iv)    C o w s supplied sufficient milk, curd, clarified butter and other necessities.
(v) Oceans offered aii types of jewels and pearls.
(vi) Mountains offered four kinds of edibies.
(vii)    Planets and their lords offered various gifts.
10. Indra's envy: Prthu, who was completely dependent on Lord Adhoksaja, was
enhanced by the Lord's mercy. But Indra, envious (asüyán) of Prthu's opulences,
created impediments for the sacrifice.
Note: King Indra is known as sata-kratu, which indicates that he performed one
hundred asvamedha-yajnas. When King Prthu was performing one hundred such
yajnas, Indra became very envious, not wanting anyone to excei him.
mwMBMWWMimMmwmW
Canto 4   0 - - - ~ C C | ^
11-12. Indra steals the horse: When Prthu was performing the last asvamedha-yajna,
envious Indra, invisible to everyone, stole the sacrificial horse, in the dress of a
heretic {pdkhandath), which made people think adharma to be dharma.
13. Prthu's son chases Indra: Atri Muni saw this and informed the son of King Prthu
of Indra's trick. Prthu's son immediately foiiowed Indra in anger, to kill him.
14. Prthu's son shoots arrows: Seeing Indra in the frauduient dress of a sannyási,
with matted iocks and smeared in ashes, Prthu's son considered him a religious
person and did not release his arrows.
15. A t r i suggests to k i l l Indra: When Prthu's son returned, Atri again instructed,
" K i l l the destroyer of sacrifice, Indra, lowest of aii demigods (vibudha-adhama)."
16. Second chase: Thus, Prthu's son immediately began to chase Indra, who was
fleeing through the sky in great haste, just as the king of vuitures Jatáyu chased
Rávana.
17-18. Indra disappears and Vijitásva gets the horse: Indra immediately gave up his
faise dress as weii as the horse and disappeared from that very spot. Prthu's son, the
great hero, brought back the horse. Seeing this great act, the sages named him
Vijitásva, he who has won the horse.
19-20. Indra steals the horse again - third chase: But powerful Indra stole the horse
again, by creating a dense darkness in the sacrificiai aréna. Thus Vijitásva chased
Indra again, whom Atri pointed out in the sky. But seeing Indra again in the dress of
a sannyási, carrying a staff with skuii on top, Vijitásva stiii did not kiii him.
21. Seeing Vijitásva, Indra disappears: Again ordered by Atri, Vijitásva angrily
aimed an arrow to kiii Indra. Upon seeing this, Indra gave up that horse and the faise
dress and became invisible.
22-25: Resuit of Indra's faise sannyási attires
22. Vijitásva again brought back the horse. Since that time, somé foolish people have
adopted the dresses of faise sannyásts, like Indra, who was not kiiied.
Note: Foolish people, seeing how Indra was not kiiied, accepted that dress with a
desire to attain siddhis, stealing other's wealth, etc, while hoping that they also
wouldn't be killed.
23. Symbois of sins: Whatever different forms Indra accepted for stealing the horse
became symbois of sins, and people who accepted those forms became known as
pákhandas or pásandis.
t^éV^lféí''é^éí ^^ií *A*íi *A3
W\,"»x-WV-3»-y'*4.19 King Prthu's One Hundred Horse Sacrifices
-,     r.iM.»ii.iiiriM   iimiiilnntiiiiiiiiiiuniiiniif-   •   -
24-25. When Indra adopted those faise sannyása dresses, peoples' minds became
attracted to such disguises, thinking that they - in the form of going naked, wearing
red garments and speaking skiifuiiy - were reai dharma.
26. Prthu takes up his how: Seeing Indra introducing such pseudo-sannyása orders,
Prthu, who was very powerful (prthu-parákramah),    angrily took up his how and
arrows to kiii Indra.
27-28. Priests dissuade P r t h u : Seeing this, the priests requested Prthu, " O great soul,
don't kiii Indra. According to sdstra only sacrificiai animals can he kiiied in a
sacrifice. Indra's power has already been reduced due to his actions. We wiii caii him
here hy Vedic mantras and forcihiy offer him into the sacrificiai fire."
29. Brahmá appears: Thus advising Prthu, the priests prepared to offer oblations
into the fire, in anger. But at that moment Lord Brahmá appeared and forbade them.
30-32a: Lord Brahmá to the Priests
30. " Y o u should not k i l l I n d r a because -
(i) He is part of the Lord's hody (bhagavat-tanuh)
(ii) This yajna is meant to satisfy the demigods, and they are aii part of Indra's
hody.
31. Indra's attempts disrupted dharma: Observe that Indra's attempts to ohstruct
the sacrifice resuited in disruption of dharma (dharma-vyatikaram). If you oppose
him any further, he wiii further misuse his power and introduce many other
irreligious systems.
32a. Let there he only ninety-nine sacrifices for Mahárája Prthu."
Note: Brahmá said that by his blessings Prthu will be more famous (prthu-kirteh)
with ninety-nine sacrifices than Indra with his hundred sacrifices.
32b-38: Lord Brahmá to Prthu
32h. Y o u know the path of liberation: "What is to be gained by performing more
sacrifices if you know the path of liberation?
33. Give up anger: Both you and Indra are parts and parcels of the Lord. Therefore
you should not be angry with Indra, who is nondifferent from you.
34. Accept the supreme wiü: Do not worry about the incomplete sacrifice. The
angry mind (ati-rustam) of a person who meditates on that which is thwarted by
providence (daiva-hatam), enters into dense darkness of materialistic thought.
35-36. Avoid spreading irreligion: Stop this sacrifice, for it induced stubborn Indra
to introduce so many irreligious aspects. Even amongst demigods, there are unwanted
desires (duravagrahah). People in generál wiii be carried away by following the
attractive sinfui activities introduced by Indra.
37-38. Purpose of your iucaruatiou: Y o u have appeared from Vena's body as an
incarnation of the Lord to protect religious principles when they were almost lost.
(You cannot act in a way that wiii spread adharma). Therefore, considering the
purpose of your incarnation, immediately stop these pseudo-reiigious systems created
by Indra."
39. Prthu makes peace: Thus after being advised, Prthu abandoned his eagerness to
perform yajnas and with affection made peace with Indra.
40. Demigods pleased: Prthu Mahárája then took his avabhrta bath, and received
benedictions from the demigods, who were very pleased by his giorious activities.
41-42. Bráhmanas' blessings: Prthu offered aii kinds of rewards to the bráhmanas
with great respect. Being satisfied, they gave their heartfelt blessings to him: " O
mighty King! A i i the assembled people - the devatás, Pitrs, great sages, etc. - have
become satisfied with your dealings and charity towards them."
9^
4.2Ü Lord Visnu Appears in the Sacrificial Aréna
'A**y3'A**
4 . 2 0 LORD VISNU'S APPEARANCE IN T H E * ^
1-6: Please forgive Indra. Knowledgeable and
detached persons are not malicious towards others,
and are not carried away by máyá.
7-8: Knowledge of soul and Supersoul makes one |
unaffected hy the modes
9-10: He serves me by occupational duties and
11-16: Lord Visrtui
attains peace and perfect vision
instructs Prthu
11-12: Understanding the soul's real position makes
one eligible for liberation
13-15: Protect the citizens and derive resultant
benefits.
16:1 am pleased with you. Ask any benediction
17-22: The              17-18: Prthu accepts the instructions, Indra begs
4.20 Lord              Lord's                                  forgiveness
affectionate
Visnu's            dealings with       '\j'l9-22: The Lord's mercy towards Prthu and Prthu's
Appearance          Prthu Mahárája                          worship of the Lord
in the
23: Benedictions like liberation are worthless.
Sacrificial
Aréna of                                   24-26: Give me millions of ears to hear Your glories!
from devotees - that restores one's relationship 1
Mahárája
with You. Only an animál gives up such hearing. 1
Prthu             23-31: Prayers
of Pfthu            27-28: I desire to sérve Your lotus feet. If Laksmi is
Mahárája                        angry, You will take my side.
29: All great devotees sérve You
30-31: Vedic allurements are bewildering. Kindly
bestow whatever you think is best for me
32-38: The Lord            32-34: The Lord blesses Prthu with bhakti and
leaves after                               departs
offering His
benediction            35-38: Prthu honours everyone and returns home
4*íí
Canto 4 Overview         S'íí«Sí*||tSé'íí^^^^^^
1 -16: L O R D V I S N U I N S T R U C T S P R T H U
1. Visnu appears w i t h Indra: Being satisfied with Prthu Mahárája, Lord Visnu, the
master of sacrifice (yajna-pati) and the enjoyer of sacrifice (yajna-bhuk), appeared
along with Indra, and spoke.
2. Please forgive Indra: "Indra, who has disturbed your hundredth sacrifice is here
seeking forgiveness from you. Therefore excuse him.
Note: An intelligent devotee does not take action against the soul or the body. If
there is any discrepancy, he forgives. Forgiveness is a quality of those who are
advancing in spiritual knowiedge.
Link: The Lord is advising Prthu to forgive Indra based on the understanding that the
soul and the body are different.
3-12: How jnána (of body, soul and Supersoul) leads to bhakti
3. No malice: Intelligent devotees (su-dhiyah), who are inclined to welfare activities
(sádhavah) and the best among humans (nara-uttamdh), are never malicious towards
others because they know that the body is different from the soul.
sudhiyah sádhavo loke naradeva narottamdh
ndbhidruhyanti bhütebhyo yarhi nátmá kalevaram
4. M á y á ' s influence: I f a personality like you, who is so advanced because of vrddha-
sevd, is carried away by mdyd, then all your advancement is a waste of time.
5. Ignorance, desire and action: Those who are in full knowiedge that this body
arises from actions due to desires arising from ignorance (avidyd-kdma-karmabhih),
do not become attached to the body.
6. Detachment: H o w can a learned person, who has no attachment to his body, be
attached to bodily productions like house, children and wealth?
L i n k : Such people with knowiedge of body and soul can equip themselves further with
knowiedge of the Supersoul (9 qualities).
7.    Supersoul                                          Conditioned Soul
/     ekah - one                                          anekah - unlimited                           ;
ii    suddhah - pure                                      asuddhah - impure
iii   svayath-jyotir - self-effulgent                      Not self-effulgent                          >
iv    nirguno - without matériái qualities                saguna - with matériái modes
V     gundsrayah - reservoir of good qualities             gunásrita - encaged in matériái qualities
vi    sarva-go - able to go everywhere                    Not able to go everywhere                    |
1* f f *t*Ii^í/     anavrtah - uncovered by matter                              dvrtah - covered by matter
viii      sáksi - witness of all activities                           asaksi - not witness of all activities
ix       nirátmdtmátmanah         - independent of jiva              Dependent on the Supersoul
X       parah - transcendental
8 . R e s u l t of k n o w l e d g e of Paramátma and atma: one is u n a f f e c t e d b y the m a t é r i á i
modes, though he is situated in the body                        {prakrti-sthah).
L i n k : Having     realized this, one then practices              bhakti-misra-jnána           (sva-dharmena).
9. H i s p r a c t i c e : H e f a i t h f u l l y (sraddhayánvitah)           serves M e (bhajate)         through his
occupational         duties    (sva-dharmena)           w i t h o u t matéria! desires         (nirásih).      T h u s he
gradually becomes s a t i s f i e d w i t h i n .
1 0 . R e s u l t of p r a c t i c e : O n e thus disassociated f r o m the modes                   (parityakta-gunah),
and      endowed w i t h perfect vision (samyak-darsana)                         and pure m i n d           (visaddsayah),
f i n a l l y attains peace and is situated equally w i t h M e                  (kaivalya).
1 1 . E l i g i b i l i t y f o r l i b e r a t i o n : One w h o understands the indifferent and f i x e d soul to
be the superintendent              of the body, senses,                 etc.   (dravya-jhána-kriyátmanám),               is
eligible for liberation f r o m           samsára.
L i n k : Hotv     can the jiva     be free of birth       and death, simply           by being indifferent        to   the
body and senses, tvhile supervising                them?
1 2 . D e v o t e e ' s e q u a n i m i t y : T h e matériái w o r l d operates due to the interaction of the
modes (guna-pravaha).              K n o w i n g the soul to be different f r o m its gross and subtle
bodies and being connected w i t h M e i n intense friendship (mayi                                   baddha-sauhrdáh),
M y devotees (sürayo)           are never agitated by happiness and distress.
Note: Jndnis become free of sarhsdra by striving for it by bhakti-misra-jndna  (sva-
dharmena in 4.20.9). But devotees, by their pure bhakti, develop detachment, and
even without striving for freedom from sarhsdra, attain that result. This is due to
their being bound to the Lord by loving friendship.
L i n k : "Since you are bound to Me by affection,                     you should follow       my     orders."
13-16: The Lord Instructs Prthu
1 3 . F o u r i n s t r u c t i o n s : (i) T r e a t higher, intermediate and l o w e r entities w i t h equality,
(ii) be equipoised i n happiness and distress, (iii) control yonr m i n d and senses, and
(iv) protect your citizens               (loka-raksanam).
1 4 . W h y s h o u l d a k i n g protect h i s c i t i z e n s ?
(i)     I f a k i n g protects his citizens, he w i l l get one s i x t h of their piety.
(ii)     I f he doesn't, the citizens w i l l take his piety and he w i l l suffer their sins.
Canto 4 Overview ^ § 4 ' ^
15. B y protecting the citizens and the earth according to the principles approved by
(anumata) and received from (anuvrtta) great brdhmanas, without attachment to
your position - (i) the citizens will love you {anurakta-lokah) and {ii) you will soon
see great saints, the Kumaras {drastdsi siddhdn).
16. A s k any benediction: I am captivated by your elevated qualities and excellent
behaviour {guna-sila-yantritah). One cannot achieve M y favour simply by sacrifices,
austerities or yoga. I am situated neutrally in the heart {sama-citta-varti) of those
who are equipoised (and not controlled by matériái conduct)."
17. Prthu accepted the instructions of the Lord {loka-gurund) on his head.
18. Indra was ashamed of his own activities and touched Prthu's feet. Prthu gave up
all hatred and embraced Indra.
19. Prthu then worshipped the lotus feet of the Lord with increasing ecstasy.
20. T h e Lord's mercy: The Lord was just about to leave, but being the well-wisher
of the devotees {suhrt satdm) and greatly inclined towards Prthu, He did not depart.
21. Prthu's bhakti: His eyes full of tears and voice choked up, Prthu could neither
see nor address the Lord. Embracing H i m in his heart, he stood with földed hands.
22. T h e Lord's feet touched the ground, and He rested H i s hand on Garuda's
shoulder. Wiping his tears, Prthu saw the Lord, but wasn't fully satisfied by looking
at H i m . Thus he offered the following prayers.
Note: The Lord's feet generally do not touch the earth. But out of affection for Prthu,
He touched the earth and placed His hand on Garuda as if to prevent Himself from
stumbling, since He is not accustomed to stand on earthly ground.
2 3 - 3 1 : PRAYERS O F P R T H U MAHÁRÁJA
23. Worthless benedictions (like liberation)
varán vibho tvad varadesvardd         O best of all benedictors, How can a learned
budhah katham vrnite guna-             person ask You for benedictions meant for
vikriydtmandm                 those bewildered by the matériái modes?
They are available even for people in hellish
ye ndrakanam api santi dehindrh
conditions.
, , . ,                          Although You are the Lord of liberation, I do
tan tsa katvalya-pate vrne na ca             , ,      , ,    ...
I                           ••              not ask tor such benedictions.
L i n k : The Lord is kaivalya-pati, but Prthu clarified that he does not desire kaivalya.
4.20 Lord Visnu Appears in the Sacrifki.il Aréna
na kdmaye nátha tad apy aharh kvacin I never want such benedictions (as liberation)
in which there is no nectarean beverage of
na yatra yusmac-carandmbujdsavah
Your lotus feet.
Please give me at least a millión ears to hear
mahattamantar-hrdayan mukha-cyuto
Your glories coming from the hearts of Your
vidhatsva karndyutam esa me varah
pure devotees through their mouths.
Note: Prthu wanted to have millions of ears, because there are unlimited talks on the
Lord's glories, and he wanted to hear them all.
L i n k : But, why don't you desire liberation which is rarely achieved?
Transcendental vibration from the mouths
sa uttamasloka mahan-mukha-cyuto
of great devotees carries the aroma of the
bhavat-paddmbhoja-sudhd kandnilah
saffron dust of Your lotus feet.
By hearing it, the forgetful living entities
j smrtirh punar vismrta-tattva-vartmanam (even had yogts) gradually remember their
kuyogindm no vitaraty alarh varaih eternal relationship with You. Other
benedictions are unnecessary.
26. Only an animál gives up bearing (Even Laksmí desires to hear)
If one somehow hears Your auspicious glories
yasah sivath susrava drya-sangame
in the association of devotees even once, he
\      yadrcchayd copasrnoti te sakrt
cannot give up that association (or
katham guna-jno viramed vind pasum
glorification) unless he is an animál. Even
srir yat pravavre guna-sangrahecchayd
Laksmi desires to hear Your unlimited glories.
27-28: Desire to sérve Your lotus feet
27. Quarrel between me and L a k s m i ! - O Supreme Person          (akhila-pürusottama),
reservoir of all transcendental qualities (gundlayam)l I desire (Idlasah) to sérve Your
lotus feet just like Laksmi (padma-kard iva), but I am afraid we would compete
(sprdhoh) and quarrel (kalir) over service to a single master (eka-pati)\
Note: Laksmi is in mádhurya-bháva while Prthu Mahárája is in dasya-bhdva. So,
there was no question of his "competing" with her on the platform of madhurya.
28. Y o u w i l l take my side: Laksmi, the mother of the universe (jagat-janani), may be
angry with me for desiring her service. Yet I am hopeful that Y o u will take my part,
for Y o u are affectionate to the poor (dína-vatsalah) and magnify even insignificant
service to Y o u . And Y o u can do without her as Y o u are self-sufficient.
Canto 4 Overview
Note: Prthu expresses his vira-bhakti (desire for competition) in relation to Laksmi.
He wonders if he will quarrel with Laksmi while performing bhakti, just as he
quarrelled with Indra while doing karma.
L i n k : Not only I, but all of Your devotees request this benediction of service.
29. Great devotees tender devotional service unto Y o u , who destroy the illusions of
matériái existence {vyudasta-máyd-guna-vibhramodayam).                        They have no reason to
take Your shelter except to constantly remember Your lotus feet (paddnusmarandd).
L i n k : Lord might say, "Then why do I ask my devotees to request benedictions?"
30. Bewiidering words of the Lord and the Vedas: Your words, "Ask for a
benediction!" and the allurements Y o u offer in the Vedas are certainly bewiidering
(jagatdrh vimohinim) to the people in generál who thus engage in karma repeatedly.
31. Kindly bestow whatever you thínk is best for me
,,    ,.  Ignorant living beings in this world, forgetful
tvan-mayayaddha jana tsa khandtto               .      . .     ,           ,
••    of their real constitutional position, aiways
yad anyád dsdsta rtatmano 'budhah   , .           . ,,
•'              •                 desire matériái happiness.
Therefore, please bestow upon me whatever
yatha cared bala-hitam pita svayarh
You think is best for me, without asking, just
tathá tvam evdrhasi nah samihitum
like a father acts for the benefit of his son.
'32-38: T H E L O R D O E E E R S B E N E D I C T I O N S T O P R T H U A N D D E P A R T S
32. " M a y you have bhakti to M e . Only by such purity of purpose, as you yourself
intelligently expressed, can one cross over M y insurmountable mdyd.
Note: Prthu requested for the most beneficial thing. The Lord awarded bhakti, which
concludes that nothing but bhakti is the most beneficial.
33. Execute M y orders carefully and don't be misled by anything. Anyone who
carries out M y orders faithfuUy, will aiways find good fortune."
34. T h e Lord appreciated the meaningful prayers of Prthu and after being properly
worshipped, blessed him and decided to leave.
35-36. Prthu honours everyone: Then Prthu worshipped the demigods, sages, Pitrs,
Gandharvas, Siddhas, Gáranas and others, with his sweet words and wealth, thinking
of them as representatives of the Lord. Then all of them returned to their abodes.
37. T h e L o r d , who captivated the minds of the king and priests, also returned.
38. Prthu returned: Although not an object of matériái vision, the Lord revealed
Himself to Prthu. Prthu offered obeisances to the Lord and returned to his home.
\
6 Mii            6                                       4.21 Instructions by Mahárája Prthu
4 . 2 1 INSTRUCTIONS BY MAHÁRÁJA PRTHU
1-6: Well decorated city, grand welcoming
1-10 The                ceremony and Prthu's reciprocation
citizens
^—•^ 7: Pfthu' s glorious activities and final destination
welcome Prthu "
Mahárája      \ a d O : Vid
Vidura requests to hear more about Prthu's
acts
11-12: Prthu's enjoyment, unrivalled rule,
11-20:                 authority over everyone except the bráhmanas
Maitreya                                  and Vaisnavas
describes
13-18: Prthu initiates a sacrifice; His bodily
Prthu's rule,
features
bodily features
and speech               j 19-20: Prthu addresses the assembly; Qualities of
.                /         [                    his speech              ^
21-22: Prthu first addresses the devotees
4.21                                           23-24: A king's duty - to give dharma s'iksa -
and his destination
Instructions              21-36:
by M a h á r á j a    Instructions of             25-26: Do your duties; bestow mercy upon me. \
Prthu              Prthu Mahárája
to the citizens                  27-30: Supreme authority and confirming
authorities
31-36: Pure bhakti, karma-mis'ra bhakti and
bhakti-mis'ra-karma
37-38: Avoid offending them, they are the cause
)   A                of the Lord's reputation
37-44: Prthu
establishes the ; /           39-41: Service to them pleases the Lord and |
glories of   c"          awards liberation. He eats through their mouths. i
bráhmanas and
Vaisnavas           \    42-44: They support the Vedas, their dust is to |
be carried on one's head. Their only wealth is
their attitűdé
45-48: All assembled personalities congratulate i
145-52: C i t i z e n s ^ / l               .-_-„lpd_btelsJPrl^
praise Pfthu        ,\j^:52T       You are our merciful, affectionate master
and have delivered us
1-3. Well-decorated city: T o receive Prthu Mahárája, the city was very beautifully
decorated with pearls, garlands, cloth, golden gates, unbroken fruits, wetted grains,
minerals, lamps, etc. The entire city was perfumed with fragrant incense and water.
4. Reception by citizens: As Prthu entered the city gate, he was received by the
citizens with many auspicious articles like lamps and flowers. He was also received
by many beautifully ornamented unmarried girls.
5. Grand welcome, but no pride: When he entered the palace, conches and
kettledrums sounded, priests chanted mantras, and reciters offered prayers. Despite
all this, the king was not proud (gata-smayah).
6. Reciprocation w i t h blessings: After being welcomed both by the important and
common citizens, the satisfied king bestowed them with their desired blessings.
7. F i n a l destination: Great King Prthu performed many glorious activities while
ruling over the earth and achieved widespread fame (yasah sphitarh). A t last he
obtained the lotus feet of the Lord (pararh padam).
: VIDURA REQUESTS T O HEAR M O R E A B O U T PRTHU'S ACTIVITIES
8. Süta G o s v á m i to Saunaka R s i : After hearing Maitreya speak about Prthu, the
originál king (ádi-rdjasya), who was well-qualified, famous, and widely praised,
Vidura submissively inquired from Maitreya as follows:
9. Empowered incarnation: "Prthu was enthroned by the sages and was given
various gifts by the demigods. He also received Visnu's strength in his arms with
which he milked the earth.
10. Remnants of his valour: "Even today, the kings and demigods of the many
planets still sustain on the desirable remnants produced by his valiant action (of
milking the earth) (vikramocchistam). What intelligent person would not hear about
him? Please teli me more about his auspicious activities."
^*11-20:    MAITREYA DESCRIBES PRTHU'S R U L E , BODILY FEATURES A N D SPEECH         |
11. Enjoyment: King Prthu happily lived in the tract of land between the Gaiigá and
Yamuná, thinking himself to be exhausting the results of his previous pious activities.
4.21 Instructions by Maharaja Prthu
Note: Prthu Mahárája was a saktydvesa-avatára and hence heyond prárabdha-karma.
Thus the terms "pious" and "impious" activities are not applicahle to him. Only out
of humility did he consider himself an ordinary conditioned soul.
12. Unrivalled: He was an unrivalled king, with dominion over all the seven islands.
No one could supersede his orders [sarvatra askhalita ddesah) except the brdhmanas
and the Vaisnavas (acyuta-gotratah).
13. Sacrifice: Once King Prthu initiated the performance of a great sacrifice in which
great rdjarsis, brahmarsis and demigods all assembled.
14. Befitting worship: There, he worshipped all the respectable visitors according to
their respective positions. Then, he stood up in that assembly like the moon amongst
the stars.
15-18. Bodily features of Prthu: Tall and sturdy; broad arms; fair complexion; red
lotus eyes; beautiful nose; beautiful face; smile with beautiful teeth; broad ebest; large
waist; abdomen shaped like a banyán leaf with three lines; deep coiled navel; golden
coloured thighs; arched instep; black, fine, curly, slick hair; conch-like neck; and
wearing valuable cloth. For performing sacrifice he put aside his dress and wore a
black deer skin and a ring of kusa grass on his finger. Thus his natural bodily beauty
was visible.
19. Prthu addresses the assembly: T o encourage and enhance the pleasure of the
assembled members, he glanced over them and spoke in a great voice.
20. Seven Qualities of Prthu's speech
cdru                       Beautiful
citra-padam                  Flowery / full of metaphors
slaksnam                     Clearly understandable
mrstam                       Pleasing to hear / delightful
güdham                       Meaningful / grave
aviklavam                    Without any doubt / faultless
sarvesdm upakdrdrtham        For the benefit of all
21. Let US reach a conclusion together: O assembled devotees (sddhavah), good
fortune upon you! A n inquisitive person should present his carefully considered
principles in the presence of devotees, for approval and to reach a conclusion.
Note: Prthu first addressed the devotees among the assembly, and not others.
I      Canto 4 Overview        "J'íífAClÍ«A5*'ÍI^^^^
l ink: The devotees might say, "You are the king and we should just worship you!"
22. I have been appointed king, by the Lord's grace, in order to rule the citizens
(danda-dharah), to protect (raksitá) them, and to employ (vrttidah) them according
to their social order.
23. Desirable destinations: When I execute my duties as king, and also when the
Lord is pleased, I will be able to achieve desirable destinations, which have been
described by experts in Vedic knowiedge (brahma-vddinah).
24. D h a r m a - s i k s á : Any king who simply exacts taxes from the citizens without
teaching them their respective varndsrama duties is liable to - (i) suffer the sins of
the citizens and to (ii) lose his good fortune of wealth and power.
25. Do your duties: Therefore, for the welfare of your king after his death, execute
your varndsrama duties properly, without envy, and aiways think of the Lord. I n
doing so, you will bestow mercy upon me.
26. Shareholders of results: I request all the pure demigods, forefathers and sages to
approve my proposal, for after death the result of an action is equally shared by its
doer [kartuh), its director (sdstuh) and its approver (anujndtuh).
Note: If a king is elevated to the heavenly planets, the citizens who cooperated by
approving of his methods are also elevated with him.
L i n k : But, how can you institute the worship of the Lord, for your father (Vena)
denied His existence?
27. Supreme authority: According to the authoritative statements of sdstra, there
must be a supreme authority. This can be observed by the presence of beautiful and
powerful bodies in this life (by sense perception) and in the next (by scriptures).
Note: The cause of different bodies is -
• Not karma - because actions are matériái and unconscious,
• Not the demigods - since they are not independent,
• The Supreme Lord - because He has the ability to do, not to do, or do differently.
L i n k : Who are those authorities who believe this point of view?
28-30. Confirming authorities are: The Vedas, and the great persons like Manu,
Uttánapáda, Dhruva, Priyavrata, Anga, Brahma, Siva, Prahlada and Bali, but not the
abominable persons like Vena, who are bewildered about dharma. They also agree
that the only bestower of the benedictions of dharma, artha, kdma, moksa and Svarga
is the Supreme Lord [gaddbhrta).
.1^1           4.21 Instructions by Mahárája Prthu
31. Devotional service cleanses one's mind
yat-pada-sevabhirucis tapasvinam By one's inclination to sérve the Lord's feet,
the contamination in the mind acquired over
asesa-janmopacitam maiam dhiyah
innumerable births
is immediately cleansed and day by day one's
sadyah ksinoty anvaham edhati sati
spiritual inclination increases.
It is like the purification done by the Ganges
yatha padángustha-vinihsrtá    sárit
water emanating from the Lord's toe.
32. A devotee doesn't surrender to matériái life again
A devotee - (i) whose mind has been cleansed
vinirdhutdsesa-mano-malah pumán
of unlimited contamination
[ii) who has developed detachment and is
asanga-vijndna-visesa-viryaván           strengthened by bhakti-yoga (has realized the
Lord's beauty)
{iii) who has taken shelter of the Lord's feet -
yad-ahghri-müle krta-ketanah punar
again
does not surrender to matériái life full of
na samsrtim klesa-vahdm prapadyate
suffering.
L i n k : The citizens might have asked, "Since we are drowned in our household
activities, how can we worship the Lord with pure bhakti?" Prthu then advised them
to do karma-misra-bhakti.
33. Render devotional service, without reservation (amdyinah), unto the Lord's lotus
feet that fulfil all desires (kdma-dughdnghri-pankajam), by -
(i) engaging your minds, words, bodies (mano-vacah-kdya-gunaih)
(ii) offering the results of your varndsrama duties (sva-karmabhih).
34-35: Bhakti-misra-karma
34. M a t é r i á i aspect of the sacrifice: The Lord is transcendental, but for the benefit
of the conditioned soul. He accepts different types of sacrifice with many matériái
qualities like rituals, mantras, ingredients, names, and the purposes of the performers.
Note: But the sacrifice becomes devoid of matériái qualities by the act of offering it
to the Lord, which gives it a small component of bhakti.
Canto 4 Overview
mmmímmxmmxmy.
35. Sacrifice offered to the L o r d : The Lord manifests in different bodies, which are
a combination of pradhdna, kdla, dsaya, etc, and He supplies the intelligence
(pratipadya cetasdm) of a sacrificer so that he may offer his actions to the Lord. The
Lord Himself then appears as the various results of those actions (kriyd-phalatvena
vibhur vibhdvyate), just as fire appears differently in various types of woods.
Note: Offering karmas to the Lord gives one jiidna (jnána-misra-bhakti), by which
one attains the Lord. However, the appearance of jnána and the resultant attainment
of the Lord depends on the amount of bhakti and faith in offering those karmas.
L i n k : The citizens were saying, "We have become successful by your instructions. We
will worship the Lord."
36. Y o u r mercy on me: A l l you citizens are worshipping the Lord, the enjoyer of
sacrifice and the supreme guru, by executing your occupational duties (sva-dharma-
yogena). Thereby you are bestowing mercy upon me (vitaranty anugraham).
(IN O R D E R T G FIRMLY ESTABLISH B H A K T I )
37. Avoid offending them: A royal family should not exhibit its matériái prowess
before brdhmanas and Vaisnavas (ajita-devatdndm) who are glorified by their
characteristic powers of tolerance, penance, knowiedge and education.
38. They are the cause of the Lord's reputation
brahmanya-devah purusah purdtano                  By worshipping their lotus feet, the eternal
nityam harir yac-carandbhivandandt and foremost person. Lord Hari
avápa laksmim anapdyinim yaso                   obtained the opulence of His staunch
jagat-pavitrarh ca mahattamdgramh reputation which purifies the entire universe.
39. Serving them pleases the Lord: The ever-independent Lord is very pleased with
those who follow in His footsteps (tat-dharma-paraih) and sérve, with all their
hearts, the brdhmanas and Vaisnavas (sarvdtmand brahma-kulam nisevyatdm), who
are very dear to H i m and vice versa (vipra-priyah).
40. Serving them is satisfying and liberating: By regular service to them, a person
becomes satisfied and achieves liberation without delay. There is no activity superior
to serving a brdhmana.
41. The Lord eats through their mouths: The Lord does not take as much pleasure
in eating through the sacrificial fire, which is devoid of consciousness, as He does in
accepting offerings through the mouths of learned sages and devotees.
4-21 Instructions by Mahárája Prthu
42. They support the Vedas: A brdhmana by his faith, austerity, scriptural
conclnsions, sense control, mind control, and meditation, supports the Vedas in order
to illuminate the real goal of life.
Note: Because the Vedas reveal everything about this world, they are compared to a
mirror in which this universe is reflected.
43. Their dust   to be carried on one's head            ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^HB
tesdm aham pdda-saroja-renum             May I perpetually carry on my crown the
dryd vaheyddhi-kiritam dyuh             dust of their lotus feet till the end of my life.
One who does so is very soon relieved of all
yam nityadd bibhrata dsu pdpath
sinful reactions, and eventually develops all
nasyaty amurit sarva-gurtd bhajanti
good and desirable qualities.
44. Their only wealth is good behaviour {sila-dhanam), gratitude (krta-jriam), and
shelter of elders (vrddha-dsrayam). One who acquires brahminical qualifications gets
all opulences. May the Lord and H i s associates be pleased with the brdhmanas, cows
and me.
4 5 - 5 2 : T H E C I T I Z E N S PRAISE P R T H U   ^jjjjj^^
45. Congratulations: After hearing King Prthu speak so nicely, all the demigods,
Pitrs, brdhmartas and devotees congratulated him by expressing their good will.
46-47. Father delivered by son: "The veda-vdkya that 'the father attains the
heavenly planets through the son' has been proved correct by Prthu who has
delivered sinful Vena from hell, just like Prahlada Mahárája delivered Hiranyakasipu.
48. May you be blessed with a long life, for you have great devotion to the Lord.
49. You have a pure reputation, for you are preaching the Lord's glories. Having
you as our master is like living directly under the agency of the Lord.
50. Affectionate to the citizens: Your excellent leadership is not so astonishing for
you because the nature of great, merciful persons is to have affection for the citizens.
51. Delivered from ignorance: We are wandering blindly {bhrdmyatdth nasta-
drsttndfh) due to our past deeds and by superior arrangement (karmabhir daiva-
sathjriitaih). But, today we have been delivered from ignorance by you.
52. Respects to the great Lord, who exists in pure goodness [vivrddha-sattvdya) and
who maintains the entire world by introducing brahminical culture and who protects
everyone through the ksatriyas."
Canto 4 Overview
4 . 2 2 PRTHU MAHÁRÁJA'S MEETING
WITH THE FOUR KUMÁRAS
1-6: Prthu's exemplary reception of the Kumaras
1-16: Prthu's                 7-9: Rarity of your dars'ana
rule, reception
of the          10-11: Fortunate and unfortunate householders
Kumáras, and      12-15: No need to ask about welfare of átmárámas
inquiries from    like you. Question: - By what means will there be
them                    benefit for suffering people?
16: Lord mercifully travels as siddha-rüpís
17k2örKuniaras appreciate Prthu's qualities and
inquiries
21-25: Answer: - attachement to Lord, detachment
from bodily concept; and means for developing it \
''17-40: Sanat^i     26-29: Subtie body - its presence, absence and íts ]
4.22 Prthu          Kumára                             destruction                       j
Mahárája's          answers
30-34: Atfachment fo sense-gratification is the cause '
Meeting             Prthu's                           of sarfisára                     ,1
question in
with the             detail
35-36: Moksa is important amongst the four
purusárthas
Four
Kumáras                                         37-38: Bhakti-mis'ra-jfíána
f39-4Ör Devotees overcome sarhsára but nondevotees]
cannot                          ]
41-42: You have come mercifully as indicated by the
Lord.                          i
41-48: Prthu
Mahárája            43-44: All that i possess is sádhu ucchistarh.
praises the      45-46: Öníy Bráhmanas enjoy and give charity with ]
Kumáras                        their own property                 J
47: No one can repay the mercy of great personalities!
49-55: Prthu executes all his duties perfectiy thinking
49-63: Prthu's               himself as the servant of the Lord
glorious rule
and qualities        56-63: Prthu's qualities in comparison with the        ]
demigods                             ]
%'íí%%^éí''&^éí''^?^é\''&lli 'ifi                               4.22 Prthu Mahárája Meets the Four Kumáras
1-6: P R T H U ' S E X E M P L A R Y R E C E P T I O N O F T H E K U M Á R A S
1-2. T h e K u m á r a s arrive: While the citizens were praising Prthu Mahárája, the four
Kumáras, who were as bright as the sun, arrived there. Seeing their effulgence, Prthu
and others could recognize who they were, as they descended from the sky.
3. Eagerness to receive: Thus the king and the citizens immediately got up to receive
them, with the eagerness of a conditioned soul attracted to sense objects.
4-5. Exemplary reception: Prthu, with shoulders lowered in humility, offered them
seats, worshipped them according to the scriptures, washed their feet and sprinkled
that water over his hair. Thus, he showed how to receive a saint.
6. W i t h respect and restraint {sraddhá-sarhyama-sariiyuktah), Prthu then began
speaking with the four Kumáras, who were seated on the golden throne.
^ ^ :   P R T H U PRAISES T H E K U M Á R A S Í ^ D ^ K J U I R E S F R O / V ^ ^ ^
7. Rare darsana: "What kind of pious activities have I performed to have your
darsana which is rare (durdarsánám) even for mystic yogts}
8. Result of pleasing vipras: One can achieve anything which is rare to obtain in this
world and the next, and one receives the favour of Siva and Visnu.
9. Rare vision/ understanding: Although you travel in all planetary systems, people
cannot see or know you, just as all people including Brahmá and other creators
cannot understand the Supersoul.
10. Fortunate householders are those who even if poor, give worthy reception to
saintly people like you, with water, a sitting place, etc.
11. Unfortunate householders are those who even if rich, do not allow Vaisnavas
into their houses, and in whose houses there is no water for washing their feet. Their
houses are like trees in which all venomous serpents live.
12. Strict b r a h m a c á r í s : Welcome! Y o u are the best of the brdhmartas (dvtja-sresthd).
You strictly observed brahmacdri vows and although you are experienced in the path
of liberation, you keep yourselves just like small children.
13. C a n there be any good fortune for people like us, whose only aim is sense
gratification [irtdriydrthdrtha-vedindm) and who have fallen into samsdra by their
own activities (patitdndrh sva-karmabhih)}
L i n k : Prthu is not asking about the tvelfare of his guests (Kumdras), but inquiring
about his otvn ivelfare! Because -
Canto 4 Overview
14. There is no need to ask of your welfare, for you are all atmaramas and make uo
meutal concoctions (mati-vrttayah) about what is auspicious or inauspicious.
15. Means for ultimate benefit? - Therefore I ask you well-wishers (suhrdah),                               by
what means will there be benefit (ksemah) for those suffering in this world?
tad aham krta-visrambhah suhrdo vas tapasvinám
samprcche bhava etasmin ksemah kendhjasá bhavet
16. The Lord's mercíful travels ín the form of siddha-rüpís
vyaktam atmavatam atma           The Lord who reveals Himself to the world and who is
bhagaván   átma-bhávanah         always anxious to elevate the living entities
svándm anugraháyemáth           travels around the world in the form of self-realized souls
siddha-rüpi caraty ajah        like you (siddha-rüpi), to show mercy to His devotees.
17-40:   S A N A T - K U M Á R A A N S W E R S P R T H U ' S Q U E S T I O N IN D E T A I L      V |
17. Prthu's speech was meaningful (saram), appropriate (susthu), concise (mitam)
and sweet (madhu). Satisfied, Sanat-kumára smiled and replied as foUows:
18. Beneficial questions: " 1 have been very nicely questioned (sadhu prstam) by you,
who are always thinking of the welfare of others                                   (sarva-bhüta-hitátmanám).
Although you know everything, you inquire because that is the behaviour of a sadhu.
L i n k : ]ust as you desire our association, ive desire yours.
19. Beneficial meetings: Discussions (sambhdsana) with questions and answers
(samprasnah) become conclusive (sammatah) in a congregation (sangamah) of
devotees (sadhünám). Such meetings spread happiness (vitanoti sam) for both the
speaker and the audience (ubhayesám).
L i n k : Prthu asked what is beneficial for himself in 4.22.15. Now the Kumaras                        answer,
"You already have what is most beneficial."
20. Attachment to the Lord's glorífication cleanses lusty desires                              WIP
asty eva raján bhavato madhudvisah                 You already have an inclination for glori-
pdddravindasya gundnuvddane                     fying the qualities of the Lord's lotus feet.
Such fixed attachment is very rare and
ratir durdpd vidhunoti naisthiki                  cleanses lusty desires from the heart, which
kdmam kasdyam maiam antar-dtmanah                    are difficult to remove, like a mineral dye
(kasdyam).
'5
4.22 Prthu Maharaja Meets the Four Kumaras
L i n k : Now the Kumaras answer Prthu's question from 4.22.15.
21. T h e only cause of benefit {ksemasya          hetuh) for humán society has been
conclusively established in the scriptures as -
(i) detachment from the bodily concept and
(ii) attachment (rati) to the Lord.
2 2 - 3 6 : Jnána-misra-bhakti (with predominance of bhakti, culminating in sánta-rati)
22-24. Attachment to the Lord and detachment from the body can be developed by
22     (sd) sraddhayd                     Having faith                                        I
bhagavad-dharma-caryayd             Being inquisitive about the process of bhakti       |
jijnásayd
ádhyátmika-yoga-nisthaya            Applying bhakti-yoga in life
yogesvara upásanayd                 Worshipping the Lord or topmost yogi (devotee)
nityam punya-sravah-kathayá         Regularly hearing and chanting the Lord's
punyayá (ca)                        glories
23      artha-indriya-dráma-sagosthy-     Not associating with persons simply interested in
atrsnayd                            sense gratification and money
Not associating with associates of materialists
tat-sammatdndm aparigrahena ca
(or) not accepting their goals
Being disgusted with the taste for sense
vivikta-rucya
enjoyment
paritása dtmani                     Being satisfied in the self
Moulding one's life so that one cannot live in
viná harer guna-ptyusa-panat       peace without drinking the nectar of the Lord's
qualities.
24 ahiritsayd                             Being nonviolent
páramaharhsya-caryayd              Following in the footsteps of great dcdryas
smrtyá mukunda dcarita agrya-      Rememhering and tasting the sweetness of the
sidhund                            excellent pastimes of the Lord
Practising yama, niyama without matéria!
yamair akdmair niyamaih (ca api)   desires
Not criticizing others (and their methods of
anindayd                           religion)
nirihayd                           Simple and plain living
dvandva-titiksayd (ca)             Tolerating duaiities
Canto 4 Overview        SI^Mll^lll^lMlMl^ll
25. Hearing gives attachment (to the Lord) and detachment (from matter)
Constant hearing of the Lord's qualities,
harer muhus tatpara-karna-püra-
which are like ornaments on the ears,        j
I         gunábhidhdnena vijrmbhamdnayd
with increasing
\-           -
bhaktyd hy asangah sad-asaty andtmani        bhakti, develops one's detachment from
sydn nirgune brahmani cdnjasd ratih         matter and attachment to the Lord.           j
26. Result of attachment to the L o r d : Such rati develops by the grace of the guru,
awakens jnána and vairagya, and destroys the subtle body, just as fire arising from
wood burns wood itself.
Note: Panca-átmakam refers to either the five elements or the five coverings of
contamination on the subtle body (ignorance, ego, attachment, hatred, fear of death).
27. Result of destruction of the subtle body [dagdhasayo              mukta-samasta-tad-guno):
One no longer sees -
(i) external (bahir) sense objects (for one's own pleasure)
(ii) internál (antar) disturbances (lamentation, etc.)
(iii) obstacles in seeing Paramátmá, which existed previously.
This is similar to the waking state in which one no longer sees the objects in a dream.
28-29: Effects of the presence and absence of the subtle body
Presence of Subtle body                                    Absence of Subtle body
28   One is subjected to various designations and sees -        One sees Paramátmá;
(i) oneself as an enjoyer due to desires                 One tries to fulfil the
(ii) things of this world as objects of sense             Lord's desires
enjoyment
(iii) the results of happiness and distress.
29   One sees differences in the bodies of oneself and           One doesn't see such
others' (just as one sees the reflection of a body          differences
appearing differently in water, oil, or a mirror.)
mmmmmmmMmmmmfmm
3 0 - 3 4 : Attachment to sense gratification is the cause of samsara
30-32. Sense gratification causes the destruction of the self
r               8
Knowiedge
Discriminating
Thinking of                                                                            is destroyed
Mind               power of                 Memory
sense
becomes           inteiiigence is              is iost            (jndna-
gratification                                   iost2
agitated                                     (bhrasyaty         bhrathsah)
(indriyair                                                         anusmrtis
(áksiptarh           (cetanárh                                  (Greatest
j visayákrstair \          manah)                harate                  cittarh)          harm to
dhyayatdrh) \
buddheh)                                    the soul) i
V                    V
33. Sense gratification leads to lower life forms
Constant thinking of                                                                  Entrance into
I Destruction of            Loss of jnána
money and its use for                                                                Immovable life
all goals                and vijhána j
sense gratification                                                                      forms
34. Be detached from things that obstruct the purusarthas
na kurydt karhicit sangam               Those who desire to cross the ocean of
tamás tivram titirisuh                nescience should never have attachment for
dharmartha-kama-moksanam                   things which completely obstruct dharma,
yad    atyanta-vighátakam                artha, káma and moksa.
35. M o k s a is the most important of the four purusarthas and must be taken very
seriously. The other three are all subject to destruction by death.
L i n k : How are the other three goals subject to       destruction?
36. T h e Lord destroys all temporary goals: There is nothing auspicious (ksemam)
for those whose goals will be destroyed by the Lord as time    (isa-vidhvarhsitásisdm).
Such temporary goals - higher (pare) or lower (avaré) - exist only in relation to the
matériái modes    (guna-vyatikardd).
3 7 - 3 8 : Bhakti-misra-jnána (with a predominance of jnána and goaI of sáyujya-mukti)
37. Understand the Supersoul who is living within the hearts of all moving and non-
moving beings, covered by bodies, senses, life airs, intelligence and falsé ego. One
should meditate, " I am H e " (so 'smi).
^ Just as the water in a laké is sucked up by the big straws growing on its bank.
canto 4 O v e r v i e f ' ^ f r ( | T | ^ j | ^ ^ ^ ^
Note: The impersonalist conception of the mantras like "tat tvam asi" and "so
'ham," is that the Supreme Lord and the jiva are one. But from the devotee's
perspective these mantras assert that both the Supreme Lord and the jiva are of the
same quality.
38. Surrender to the Supersoul, who is one with cause and effect, is ever liberated
(nitya-mukta), completely pure (parisuddha), and the highest truth (visuddha-tattva).
One who has transcended maya by deliberate consideration, which clears the
misconception of a snake for a rope, can understand H i m .
L i n k : Understanding    Prthu's distaste for the words "so 'smi" (in 4.22.37),             Sanat-
kumára now speaks about pure bhakti. So far he spoke about the path of bhakti mixed
with jiiána. Now he will explain pure bhakti which is the best path.
39. Give up karmásayam by serving Lord Vásudeva
By engaging in the service of the toes
yat-páda-pankaja-palása-vilása-bhaktyá
of the lotus feet of the Lord,
devotees very easily uproot the hard-
karmásayam grathitam udgrathayanti santah
knotted desires for fruitive activities.
But nondevotees (jnánts and yogis),
tadvan na rikta-matayo yatayo 'pi ruddha-
even if they strongly try, cannot stop
the waves of sense gratification.
sroto-ganas tam aranarh bhaja vasudevam
Therefore worship Vásudeva.
Note: One can give up inferior desires when engaged in superior desires. When the
tide from the ocean overfloods a river, the waves of the ocean take prominence over
those of the river. Similarly, a devotee plans so many things for the Lord's service that
his stagnant matériái desires become overflooded by the desire to sérve the Lord.
40. Cross samsara with the beat of the Lord's feet
The ocean of nescience is very
krcchro mahan iha bhavarnavam aplavesarh
difficult for nondevotees to cross,
because it is infested with many
sad-varga-nakram asukhena titirsanti
dangerous sharks.
Therefore, by making the Lord's
tat tvath harer bhagavato bhajaniyam anghrim
worshipable lotus feet
as a boát, cross this difficult ocean
krtvodupam vyasanam uttara           dustarárnam
of sathsára
4.22 Prthu Maharaja Meets the Four Kumaras
. 4 1 : 4 8 ; P R T H U M A H Á R Á J A PRAISES T H E K U M Á R A S
41. After being thus enlightened by Sanat-kumára, who was well versed in spiritual
knowiedge (átma-medhasá),    the king praised the Kumáras as foUows:
42. " Y o u confirmed L o r d Visnu's blessing. Formerly He showed me His causeless
mercy, by indicating that you would come to my house.
43. What can I offer? - Y o u have carried out the Lord's order, because you are as
compassionate as He. Since all that I possess is sádhu-ucchistam,   how can I give
anything as guru-daksina}
Note: Prthu gave all his wealth in charity at the end of his horse sacrifice. What
remained he considered the remnants of the devotees. And even before that he
considered his kingdom to have been given to him by the saintly persons headed by
Bhrgu, who churned his body from King Vena. Thus he only possessed remnants.
44. I offered everything - my life, wife, children, home, furniture, kingdom,
strength, land and treasury to saintly persons.
45. W h o can be a leader? Only one who knows the principles of Vedic knowiedge
deserves to be the commander-in-chief, leader of the state, punisher, and ruler of all
planets.
Note: By saying verses 44 and 45, Prthu indirectly offered everything to the Kumáras.
46. Bráhmanas' mercy: It is the bráhmanas who enjoy, wear and give what is their
own property. By their mercy, the ksatriyas, vaisyas and südras eat their food.
47. Non-repayable debt
The path of self-realization is explained by
yair idrsi bhagavato gatir atma-vada         the knowers of the Vedas for our
ekántato nigamibhih pratipáditá nah          eniightenment with complete conviction and
Vedic evidence.
Such merciful personalities can be satisfied
tusyantv adabhra-karunah
only by their own activities of uplifting the
sva-krtena nityam
fallen souls.
Who can repay them? One can only offer
ka nama tat pratikaroti
water with földed hands    (viná-uda-pátram).
vinoda-pátram
One who tries to repay them is a joker."
48. T h e Kumáras departed: After being thus worshipped by Prthu, the Kumáras
were pleased. They praised the character of the king and went to Satyaloka.
49. Position: Mahárája Prthu, being completely f i x e d i n pure bhakti, was the chief
amongst great personalities [dhuryo mahatám).         He considered himself almost
satisfied [ápta-kdmdn iva) by the teachings about átmd      (ddhydtma-siksayd).
Note: Since he was a pure devotee, he could be fully satisfied only by pure bhakti.
50. Duties (besides bhakti):      He performed his duties according to time, place,
strength and financial position, all with the one aim to satisfy the Absolute T r u t h .
Note: Pure devotees like Prthu are beyond the execution of karmas, yet as
householders, they sometimes engage in karmas -
(i) to teach people in generál,
(ii) to avoid lapses in following the rules of varnasrama,
(iii) to avoid criticism of the path of bhakti,
(iv) to protect the confidentiality of pure bhakti.
They remain detached and uncontaminated by such karmas.
51. Mood: Prthu always thought of himself as the servant of the L o r d , who is the
proprietor of everything. He dedicated the fruits of all his activities unto the Lord.
52. Unaffected: Although Prthu was a householder, possessing kingdom and wealth,
he never used his opulence for sense gratification and thus remained unaffected, just
like the sun.
53-54. Progeny: He performed all fruitive activities without attachment and by his
own desire produced five sons, named Vijitásva, Dhümrakesa, Haryaksa, Dravina
and V r k a , in his wife Arci. He embodied all the qualities of the devatas.
55. Protection: Being Krsna conscious (acyutdtmakah), Mahárája Prthu wanted to
protect the Lord's creation according to time, by pleasing the citizens with his
attractive qualities, words and mind.
6        fI t'l              I   ***       4.22 Prthu Maharaja Meets the Four Kumaras
56-63:     QUALITIES OF PRTHU
Compared with    Prthu's Qualities
56    Moon             Pleasing and celebrated
Sun              Powerful and exacting
57    Fire             Unconquerable - no one can disobey his orders
Indra            Insuperable
Earth            Tolerant
Heaven           Fulfilling various desires
58    Rainfaii         Satisfying everyone
Sea              Unfathomable - No one could fathom his purposes
Meru             Fixity in purpose
59    Yamarája         Intelligence in delivering exact punishment
Himalayas        Opulences
Kuvera           Riches
Varuna           No one could reveal his secrets
60    Wind             Bodily and sensual strength
Rúdra            Intolerant
61    Cupid            Beautiful
Lion             Fearless
Manu             Affectionate
Brahma           Powerful
62    Brhaspati        Knowledgeable of Brahman
Supreme Lord     In control of his senses
Himself          Devotion to cows, elders, bráhmanas and devotees, and in
helping others with bashfulness, humility and cheerfulness.
63. Prthu Maharaja's reputation was loudly declared throughout the whole universe
and all ladies and saintly persons heard his glories, which were as sweet as the glories
of Lord Rámacandra.
4 . 2 3 MAHÁRÁJA PRTHU'S G O I N G BACK H O M E
1-3: Prthu goes to the forest along with
his wife
4-8: Prthu's austerities, their purpose
1-18: Prthu's                       and results
vanaprastha life,
austerities and       9-10: Prthu worships the Lord through
departure                      adhyatma-yoga
11-12: Prthu destroys his subtle body
13-18: Prthu gives up his gross body
19-20: Arci's voluntary austerities and
19-22: Arci performs            service to her husband
Prthu's funeral rites
and enters its flames    21-22: Arci's lamentation and entrance
into her husband's funeral pyre
4.23 Mahárája
Prthu's Going                            23-24: Demigods sounded Instruments
Back Home                                      and showered flowers
25-26: Arci served her husband
perfectiy, surpassing the devatas
23-30: The
demigods' wives
praise Arci            27-28: Glories of the humán form.
Those who misuse this opportunity are
killers of the soul
29-30: Arci reached the planet of her
husband
Planet attained by Prthu, perfection in
occupation, progeny, opulence, fame,
31-39: Phala-sruti
knowiedge, auspiciousness, long-life,
heaven, victory, etc.
^ií &^éí &^íí '&'tí''&'íi                                                              ' Ö i ^     4.23 Mahár
. - 1 8 : P R T H U ' S VANAPRASTHA LIFE, AUSTERITIES A N D DEPARTURE
I - 3. Prthu retires: Realizing his old age, Prthu, the maintainer of all kinds of living
entities, having executed the orders of the Lord, handed over the earth to his sons.
Then he went to the forest with his wife, while the citizens lamented in separation.
4 - 8 : Prthu's austerities, their purpose and results
4. Severity: There, he underwent severe austerities according to the vanaprastha rules
as seriously as he engaged formerly in leading the government and conquering.
5. Eating: In tapo-vana, he sometimes ate roots, sometimes fruits and dried leaves,
and for somé weeks he drank only water. Finally he lived simply by breatbing air.
6. Seasons: He - (i) placed fires around himself during the summer, (ii) exposed
himself to torrents of rain during monsoon, {iii) stood in water up to bis neck in
winter. He used to sleep on the earth.
7. Purpose: He underwent all these austerities of controUing bis words, senses, sexual
impulse and life airs only to satisfy L o r d K r s n a .
8. Results: By such austerities be - (/') gradually became steadfast, (ii) destroyed bis
karma and became joyful, (iii) controlled bis mind and senses by pránáyáma and
(iv) cut bis bondage to the world.
9 - 1 0 . Unflinching devotion: He constantly worshipped the Lord by following the
path of adhyatma-yoga (bhakti-yoga) as taugbt by Sanat-kumára. Thus bis devotion
to Lord Krsna became unflinching and fixed.
I I - 1 2 : Prthu destroys his subtle body
11. By such practice of bhakti bis mind became suddha-sattva and be could constantly
think of the L o r d . In bis purified mind appeared jnána and vairágya, by wbicb be
destroyed the subtle body (jiva-kosam), and transcended all doubts.
12. When be became free from all other concepts of life (anya-dhir), Prthu realized
the form of Paramátmá (átma-gati). Being without desire (nirihas) for siddhis, be
destroyed bis subtle body by jiiána and then gave up that jiiána. Unless yogis and
jhánís become attracted to krsna-kathá, their illusions can never be dispelled.
1 3 - 1 8 : Prthu gives up his gross body
13. In due course of time, Prthu fixed bis mind firmly upon Lord Krsna, and being
completely situated on the brahma-bhüta         platform, be gave up bis gross body.
Note: Prthu, being a pure devotee and a saktyávesa-avatára, did not have matériái
subtle and gross bodies. Also Prthu, out of his great humility did not consider himself
a great devotee and hence meditated on destroying his subtle body. This is mentioned
in order to preserve the mentality of materialists. Amongst the Lord's forms. Ráma
does not give up His body, and amongst the devotees, Dhruva does not up his body.
14. Sitting in muktásana, Prthu raised bis life air from the müládhara-cakra   (anus)
svádhisthána-cakra   (navel)    manipüraka-cakra     (abdomen) —>• andhata-cakra
(beart) —>• visuddhi-cakra (tbroat)    djná-cakra (between two eyebrows).
15-16. Merging the matériái body: From there be raised the air to the brahma-
randhra, and without desire, mérged bis life air with the totality of air. He mérged
the remaining gross elements of bis body into the totality of those gross elements.
Then be mérged earth —>• water —>• fire —>• air     sky.
17. He then mérged the mind —> senses —>• sense objects                        ahankdra           mahat-tattva.
18. He placed the mahat-tattva into prakrti and then gave up prakrti situated beside
bim by the power of jnana and vairagya and by the force of bhakti. I n this way,
being already situated in bis svarüpa (Krsna consciousness), be gave up bis body.
19. A r c i voluntarily foUowed Prthu into the forest and toucbed ber lotus feet to the
ground, despite being a delicate queen, unsuited to austerities.
20. Pleasure of service: Tbougb sbe became tbin by performing austerities like sages,
sbe did not feel any pain because sbe derived pleasure in serving ber husband.
21. Lamentation and funeral: Seeing ber merciful husband's body without life
symptoms, sbe lamented for a little wbile and then placed the body on a funeral pyre.
22. Entered the fire: Sbe executed all the necessary rituals and offered respects to the
demigods. Sbe then circumambulated the fire three times and entered its flames wbile
meditating on the lotus feet of ber husband.
23-30: T H E      D E M I G O D S ' W I V E S PRAISE A R C I
23-24. Demigods praise: Seeing this amazing act, tbousands of wives of the
demigods, along with their busbands, began glorifying Arci. The demigods played
instruments and their wives sbowered flowers on the funeral pyre. They spoke:
25. Service to the husband: " A l l glories to Queen A r c i ! She served her husband with
mind, speech and body exactly as Laksmi serves Visnu.
26. She surpassed the devatas: That must he her travelling in the sky. She is still
following ber husband upward. Arci has surpassed us in inconceivable actions
(tbougb an inbabitant of the earth).
j
4.23 Maharaja Prthu's Going Back Home
L i n k : We also desire to achieve such good fortune by taking humán           births.
27. Nothing is unattainable: Eartbly bumans have only a sbort lifespan (loldyuso).
But by engaging in devotional service (naiskarmyam), they go back to Godbead
(bhagavat-padam). What is unattainable for them?
28. Killers of the self
1^ sa vahcito batátma-dhruk              Certainly be is envious of himself and is cbeated who,
krcchrena mahatd bhuvi            even after attaining, with great difficulty, the rare    |
labdhvdpavargyam mdnusyam               buman form of life capable of giving liberatiou,
visayesu visajjate           wastes it for sense gratification.
29. A r c i attained the same planet as Prthu: Wbile the wives of the demigods were
thus talking. Arci reached the same planet as that of ber husband (pati-lokam).
30. Prthu's story is wonderful. He is powerful and has great character. Thus I
(Maitreya) have described bim as far as possible.
31-39: P H A L A - S R U T I
31-36: One who faithfully and attentively reads or hears this pastime...
31    Attains tbc abode of Prthu (Vaikuntba)
j         A brahmana becomes the most learned
A ksatriya becomes the leader of this world
A vaisya becomes the master of other vaisyas and cows
'         A sudra becomes the best devotee
A childless person becomes blessed with good children
A poor man becomes the richest
A person with no reputation becomes famous
34    A fool becomes learned
One gains all auspiciousness and no inauspiciousness
Achieves: wealth, fame, a long life, Svarga, immunity from Kali-yuga's
influence, the results of all four purusarthas.
36     A king attains victory, ruling power, and tribute from subordinate kings.
37. Must hear: A pure devotee, wbile discbarging devotional service, must bear, read
and induce others to bear about the character and life of Prthu Mahárája.
38-39. Conclusion: Hearing and chanting about Prthu Mahárája enricbes one's
devotional attitűdé, faith, and attraction to the Lord's lotus feet, wbicb are the boát
for Crossing the ocean of nescience (bhava-sindhu-pota-pdde). Thus one can go back
bome, back to Godbead, like Mahárája Prthu.
Canto 4 Overview
4 . 2 4 CHANTING THE S O N G S U N G BY L O R D SIVA
1-7: Vijitas'va's progeny and his
renunciation
1-15: Genealogical
line of Prthu
8-15: Vijitásva   Havirdhana
Prácinabarhi - * Pracetas
16-17: Vidura' s questions about the
meeting of Lord Siva and the Pracetas |
19-23: Description of the laké where the
16-32: The Pracetas     Pracetas went to perform austerities
meet Lord Siva
24-32: Siva arrived, explained his
inclination toward Lord Vásudeva's
devotees and said that he will teach
them an auspicious mantra
33-43: Obeisances to the Lord in the
4.24 Chanting
form of Caturvyüha and the presiding
The Song Sung                                    deities of the elements for self-
By Lord Siva                                               purification
44-53: Seeing and serving the Lord's
giorious form
33-68: Rudra-gTta
54-59: Glory oí bhakti and bhakta.
Association of a pure devotee is the
Lord's real mercy
60-68: Relation between the Lord and
the matériái creation
69-71: How to chant the Rudra-gíta to j
achieve auspiciousness
69-79: How to chant
72-73: Origin of the Rudra-gíta
the Rudra-gíta.
Phala-sruti
74-79: Phala-sruti - One becomes a
devotee, pleases the Lord, fulfils desires
and attains freedom.
§í^r«AJMÍÍ'Sj^^^^                               4.24 Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva    I
L i n k : After describing the life and character of Mahárája   Prthu, Maitreya   began to
speak the genealogical line of the Prthu dynasty.
Illll^^
1-2. Vijitásva, the eldest son of Prthu, who had a reputation like his father's (prthu-
sraváh), hecame the emperor. Being affectionate to his younger hrothers, he gave
them different regions to rule -
(i) Eastern region to Haryaksa
(ii) Southern region to Dhümrakesa
(iii) Western region to V r k a
(iv) Northern region to Dravina
3a. Pleased Indra: Formerly, Vijitásva pleased Indra, and received from him the
ability to disappear. Therefore be was called Antardbána.
Note: Although Indra was stealing the horse from his father, liberal Vijitásva
purposefuily excused him, since he was a great demigod and servant of the Lord.
Thus Indra became very pleased with him and gave him this boon.
3h-5. Vijitásva's wives and sons:
(i) Vijitásva + Sikbandini —> Pávaka, Pavamána and Suci
Tbese sons were formerly firegods. Tbey were cursed by Vasistba and
became sons of Vijitásva, but later tbey again attained tbeir positions as
demigods of fire.
(ii) Vijitásva + Nabbasvati —> Havirdbána.
6. Retirement: Considering bis kingly duties (rájnárh vrttirh) like taxing, punisbing
and fining people to be very severe and painful (dárunám), Vijitásva gave tbem up on
tbe plea of performing a long sacrifice (karma-yoga).
7. Destination: Although engaged in sacrifice, be worshipped tbe Supreme Lord,
Paramátmá, in tbe form called Hamsávatára and attained H i s planet very easily.
8. Havirdbána + Havirdbáni —> 6 sons: Barhisat, Gaya, Sukla, Krsna, Satya and
Jitavrata.
9. Barhisat was a Prajápati expert in karma-kánda      sacrifices and mystic yoga.
10. Sacrifices: He performed many sacrifices and scattered kusa grass all over tbe
eartb, witb tbeir tips pointing east (prácinágraih).
11a. Marriage: On tbe order of Brabmá, Barhisat (Prácinabarhi) married Satadruti,
tbe very young and beautiful daugbter of tbe ocean.
I      Canto 4 Overview       f' |íirp|rí^^^^^^
l l b - 1 2 . Satadruti's beauty attracted even Agni during ber marriage ceremony.
Everyone was captivated by tbe tinkling of ber ankle bells.
13. Prácinabarbi + Satadruti    10 Pracetas, wbo were all equal in vows and endowed
witb religiosity  [dharma-snátdh).
14. T h e Pracetas, being ordered by tbeir fatber to heget children, entered tbe ocean
for 10,000 years to perform austerities and worship tbe Supreme Lord.
15. Rudra-gita: On tbeir way tbey met Lord Siva, wbo was pleased witb tbem and
gave tbem instructions (and bis prayers). Witb complete control (sarnyatáh), tbe
Pracetas meditated on (dhydyantah), cbanted (japantah) and worshipped {püjayantah)
tbese instructions.
Note: The orders of the spiritual master are the sustenance of the disciple.
Perfectional meditation is always meditating on the order of tbe spiritual master.
1 6 - 3 2 : T H E PRACETAS M E E T L O R D SIVA
1 6 - 1 7 : Vidura's questions to Maitreya
16. Q l : What did Lord Siva, being pleased, speak when tbe Pracetas met bim?
17. Q 2 : H o w did tbey get bis rare darsana}
18. Lord Siva is self-satisfied, but to belp people accomplisb tbeir matériái desires be
manifests in tbe matériái world, accompanied by bis dangerous energies like goddess
Káli and Durgá.
Reply of Maitreya
19. Tbe Pracetás, accepting tbeir father's instructions (pitur vdkyam) on tbeir beads
[sirasdddya), travelled westward to perform austerities.
20-23: Description of the Laké
20. C a l m : Tbey saw a buge, beautiful laké wbicb was calm like tbe mind of a saint
(mahan-mana). Its inbabitants appeared very peaceful.
21. Lotuses and birds: It was filled witb various beautiful lotuses (blooming in day,
nigbt and twiligbt) and sweet-sounding birds (swans, cranes, cakravdkas and
kdrandavas).
22. Pestivé atmospbere: There were also trees, creepers and bumming bees, and tbe
wind scattered lotus pollen everywbere.
23. Celestial music: Tbe Pracetás became amazed bearing attractive celestial songs.
^^tí'^^it'&'éV'&'t\''&'ií              '^Sl        4.24 Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva
24-25. Siva appears: At that time they saw Lord Siva (with a golden complexion,
bluish tbroat and three eyes) along witb bis associates emerge from tbe lake. Tbey all
offered tbeir obeisances.
26. Siva was pleased witb tbe Pracetás because of tbeir knowiedge of dharma
(dharma-jnana) and tbeir good conduct (sila-sampanndn). Thus be spoke to tbem:
27. Siva said, "Good fortune unto you. I know your plans and have come here to
give you mercy.
L i n k : Siva explains why he is merciful to the Pracetas.
28. Krsna's devotee is dear to me: Anyone wbo is completely surrendered to
Vásudeva, tbe controUer of everything is actually very dear to me.
yah páram ramhasah sdksdt tri-gundj jtva-samjnitdt
bhagavantam vdsudevam prapannah sa priyo hi me
29. Attaining Brabmá, Siva and V i s n u :
•   A person fixed in dharma for a bundred births attains tbe post of Brabmá
•   By more pious acts one attains me, Siva.
•   But by unalloyed devotional service, a Vaisnava attains Vaikuntba.
30. Siva and Krsna's devotees: Therefore, devotees like you (bhdgavatdh) are as dear
to me as tbe Lord Himself, and tbe devotees also consider me as dear to tbem as tbe
Lord Himself.
31. Powerful mantra: Let me give you a pure (pavitrarh), auspicious (mangalam) and
transcendental (páram) mantra, tbe chanting of wbicb bestows tbe bigbest benefit
(nihsreyasa-karam)."
32. Witb a merciful beart, Siva spoke to tbe Pracetás wbo stood witb földed bands:
33-68: R U D R A - G Í T A
3 3 - 4 3 : Obeisances to the Lord in the form of the catur-vyüha and the presiding
deities of the elements for self-purification
33. The Lord's quality                                  Purpose of Prayer
You are tbe best of tbe self-realized (dtma-vid-
Let me also have that auspicious
varya) since You are always auspicious for tbe
condition (svastir astu me)\
self-realized (svastaye).
You are worshipable by virtue of tbe all-perfect        Let me have perfection by
instructions You give.                                  worshipping you.
Canto 4 Overview
Deity              Deity of        Function of Deity          Purpose of Prayer
34   Vásudeva           Conscious-      Controller of the          Please make my citta peaceful
(All-              ness (citta)    senses and sense           (sdntdya) and uncbanging
pervading)                         objects [bhüta-            (kütdsthdya) and make it
: süksmendriydtmane)        conscious of bhakti by reveal-
ing Your beauty (sva-rocise).
35   Sankarsana         Falsé ego        Master of                 Bind my possessiveness
(Master of         [ahankdra)       disintegration [or] tbe   (mamatva) to tbe Lord and
Integration)                        destroyer of tbe          my ego [ahankdra) to my true
; universe (antakdya)       identity as His devotee.
Pradyumna          Intelligence    Enligbtener of tbe         Wake up my intelligence so
(Respon-           (buddhi)        universe [visva-           that it will situate me in
sible for                          prabodhdya)                bhakti.
universal
growtb)
36   Aniruddha          Mind            Director of tbe mind        Attract my mind to tbe Lord's
(Supreme           (manas)         [indriya), wbicb is tbe     lotus feet tbrougb bhakti
director)                          cbief of tbe senses         alone and keep it in tbe
I                   (hrsikesa)                  perfect state of cleanliness.
Link: After purifying the four components of the antah-karana (citta, ahankdra, buddhi
and manas) by worshipping their upasya deities, he offers respects to the Lord in the
form of the presiding deities of the elements, in four verses, in order to purify the five
gross elements which constitute the body and the external senses.
36   Surya (Ani-        Lye            Constantly nourisbes        May my eyes be purified to see
ruddba's                          (nibhrta) tbe jiva          tbe form of tbe Lord.
37   expansion)                        (dtmane) by rain, etc.
Door to tbe beavens
and liberation (svarga
apavarga-dvdrdya)
Agni               Speech         Accomplisbes tbe            Lngage my words in chanting
actions of tbe four         tbe glories of tbe Lord.
priests (cdtur-hotrdya)
and expands tbe fire of
sacrifice.
Link: Though the mind had already been purified by offering respects to its updsya deity
(for worship), Aniruddha, because the mind is difficult to control, he again purifies it by
offering respects to the presiding deity, the Moon (Soma).
'fim                     6
ja
4.24 Chanting the Song Sung hy LflOd
38    Soma           \4inn              P m v l n p r o r t n p PifrloKíiíí ÍIQ W P I I                                  P li pc ad sd pc
X                    o
L /nL ri iiifi v
y im
iiv
y d
up nLt so
cu
Í.VX111U
(trayydh                          as a l l t h e demiffofls                               iütiű.           i'sp\   to the Pitás dpvű.td\,\J    XIXV.' X X L c X a j       CXC-X* X » X X » a a
- Master                                                                                                           saees and iivas and
of the                                                                                                             completely engage my
three                                                                                                              m i n d i n hhciRti
XXxXXXXX XXX                 rbvfX.X'r B
Vedas or        l^Ct Qt"P         í r i v p r         or     TíJcrp r o r             rnp                          Ix^alzp m v rono'iip raQrp
VJiVCi              KJL L d o L C I L Í i           LIIC          ftl/Uo         IVldlVC lliy                 LUllgLtC           LddLC
worlds)                           itTlitÍ-tÍű.vű. cű. Íivű.fiű.ffi\ a n d t h e                                    the sweetness of thines
X X X L X ,¥ X^W-XXXX.*LJLJ V.^X X X X X X X * ^ * J
f o r m o f a l l taste ifiü.ífiű.h X X^X XX XX^XX XX.^ XXX X^ X.XX.^X XX •
Tú. 1 Lf a t i X x r r X v x r x c - /
tbine excent úrasdda.
XXXXXXX^ X . X X X ' X ' L . * X       ' X*',^li»X*X»,
39    Hiranya-       K m noH      1 -   C o n f a i n s fnp sonls of all livino'                                         \ r i r m i l a r p m v noQP r o
x>LiiiiLlldLC l i i y                 iiUdC LO
garbha         incnr or           Dcings [Sulivu)                                                                  otYiall            # " n a T"t*afTf*on/"*a            r\r
sthe
m e iTi otne  iragrance oi
r d Fnpape m v
Earth
Virát-                            F o r m n f all the elements                                                     bodv and evervone's
X vXX X X I         \JÍ    CXXl L X X V ' v - X L ' X X X L ' X X L a            X.^V.¥XX T         XXXXXX X* T X/X J X . ' X X ^ \J
rüpa                                                                                                               nodv                       senses^ i n
the T o r d ' s service
xxx^                  XX a    a^^x    T XX^XI*,
Váyu           Air                P r o T p p r o r o r r h p rrirpp u r o r l o c                                 F n r p r rnp mtnri
IJjllLCl l l l C l l l l i l U ^
cpticpc
oClioCo
o n / H n/'\/Hi7' a o c/iLi/i                    /~\i/ic
[iTuiíOKyu-puiuyci)y                                     wno
ano     uotiy as   suna, ojus
im
i i ad ii n
i i rL a
c iiini icd   rL n
i lp
c im
i im
i i irLii ^ cpncpc
aCiiaca a
dni ir u
i         1 n í H yi/ii/i
dilLi
anUUlUy           dllCl l I l d K C
body                                                                             them siiitable f o r
worshipping tbe Lord.
Stimulate mv touch to
xf XXXXX XXXCX X ^ XXX T XVXXXXirXX x x x
feel tbe softness of tbe
XX.'X'X XXXX.' XFVXX XXXX^XBX, XXX x x x x .
Lord's bodv.
M.J\J ±. XX XF XF VXXX T ,
40    Nabba -        Sound              • Kcveais tne acruai meaning or                                                   iV ^ /X I.F' a     r v x ¥ r a a T*F-íviaKe my ears near
Etber                                     pirpr^rr
C V C l y Ln
l lilnl lO"
g.                                                  a
dUnO
oUn Lr rL n pU
llC npaiir\r
CdLlLy Oo ri
•       iSJ n
uo o oo irLr Q
pp         a cp
VvC pl ry v Lr n
i iiini o
i g",                         rhp T orH                    Rpvpal rhp
LllC       1_internally and externally.                                               meaning of the name.
• T h e ultimate goai of pious                                                  mantra and bhakti
acts both i n this world and                                             scrintures icnantine;
XXX.'X X Ly X XXX X ' X F     1 X^XXXXXX XXX Xx^
beyond.                                                                  Hare Krsna).
41-   Tbe Supreme                        •      lTncricraror
llaLlgdLOl Oo ri tlilUT                          /iIt/Jft^/nc
rrtUb              1T o
o ri ri p
c ir irpQnpprQ
copccLD                  rLo
Uvyo
onu
42    Personality of Godbead                    1 -tiV/II      ivtt/Tyi/I          -t/t 11 tvt't/T\1/l      1
\píuuíLiuyu                               iiiuiiLuyu)
Krsna (Giver of                    •      VírOtpr o ri ifCpocUnllLrac Oo lr
JlVCi O
inspiration and all                       worshipping Pitrs {pitr-
results)                                  devdya karmane)
• Giver of result of irreligious
acts (adharma vipdkdya)
'^•iy«~i:
F   Wéí
Canto 4 Overview
Giver of death and miseries
(mrtyave duhkha-ddya)
Topmost of benedictors
(dsisdm is a)
Tbe supreme Manu (manave)
Perfection of all kinds of
mantras (manave)
Tbe cause of all causes
(kdrandtmane)
43    Lord Siva   Lalse Lgo         Reservoir of 3 kinds of            May the Lord's mercy
(ahankdra)        energies: adhidaiva,               purify falsé egotism so
adhydtma and adhibhauta -          that real egotism can
devatds, senses and elements       be awakened (aham
(sakti-traya-sametdya)             brahmdsmi - tbe
Source of egotism, Rúdra           spirit soul performing
(midhuse ahankrtdtmane)            devotional activities).
Lorm of knowiedge and
action (senses) (ceta-dkütí-
rüpdya)
Revealer of tbe Yedas (vdco
vibhütaye)
L i n k : Remembering   in this way, purifying     the body, senses and mind by         offering
respects. Lord Siva become qualified. Now he prays to see the Lord.
4 4 - 5 2 : Seeing and Serving the Lord's Giorious Form
Particular form of the Lord
44      darsanarh no didrksündrh          I wisb to see You exactly in tbe form that
dehi bhdgavatdrcitam            Your very dear devotees worship.
rüpam priyatamam svdndm            Only that form liked by tbe devotees can              j
sarvendriya-gundnjanam           perfectly satisfy all tbe demands of tbe senses.
Colíection of all beauty
45   snigdha-prdvrd-ghana-sydmam          Tbe Lord glistens, dark like a rain cloud,            |
sarva-saundarya-sangraham'*        tbe sum totál of all beauty,                          j
* Note: Sarva-saundarya-sangraham indicates that Lord Krsna contains all the
beauties in the matériái and spiritual worlds. It also indicates that the Lord gives more
credit to His devotees than He takes for Himself.
wmmmmmmmmmmmmm
S^r'ST|)í'@lir'Ö^^                                  4.24 Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva
cárv-áyata-catur-bdhu             with four long arms
sujdta-rucirdnanam              and noble, attractive face.
46        padma-kosa-paldsdksam              The Lord has eyes like lotus petals,
sundara-bhru sundsikam             graceful brows and raised nose,
sudvijam sukapoldsyam             fine teeth and forehead,
sama-karna-vibhüsanam              and well-proportioned, decorated ears.
The Lord's ever increasing beauty
47         priti-prahasitdpdngam             The Lord's joyful glancé indicates His affection.
alakai   rüpa-sobhitam           His beauty is enbanced by bis curling bair.
lasat-pankaja-kinjalka-           His clotb glows like lotus pollen.
dukülam    mrsta-kundalam          He wears glittering earrings,
48          sphurat-kirita-valaya-           a crown, bracelets,
hdra-nüpura-mekhalam              a necklace, anklets and a beit.
sankha-cakra-gadd-padma-            His beauty is increased by His concb, cakra,
mdld-many-uttamarddhimat            club, lotus, garland and jewels.
The Lord's shoulder and chest
49                                           Tbe Lord's lion-like sboulders glitter witb
sifhha-skandha-tviso bibhrat
reflections from His jewels.
saubhaga-griva-kaustubham           Tbe Kaustubba jewel beautifies bis neck.
sriydnapdyinyd ksipta-            His ebest glowing witb tbe mark of imperisb-
nikasdsmorasollasat             able Laksmi, surpasses a gold-testing stone.
The Lord's navel and belíy
50         püra-recaka-samvigna-              Tbe lines on His abdomen (like a banyán leaf),
vali-valgu-dalodaram              beautifully move witb His inbaling and exbaling.
pratisankrdmayad visvam             Tbe universe sprouted from His deep, twirled
ndbhydvarta-gabhirayd              navel and wisbes to go back.
The Lord's lower body
51       syáma-srony-adhi-rocisnu-            He has especially attractive black bips covered
duküla-svarna-mekhalam              witb clotb and enclosed by a beit.
_   sama-cdrv-anghri-janghoru-           He is elegant witb symmetrical feet, calves,
nimna-jdnu-sudarsanam              tbigbs and knees.
Link: Lord Siva has thus described the bodily features of the Lord authoritatively. Now
he wants to see the lotus feet of the Lord.
Canto 4 Overview
52                                       Your two lotus feet are as beautiful as two
pada sarat-padma-palasa-rocisa
autumn lotus petals,
nakha-dyubhir no 'ntar-agharh     and dissipate tbe darkness in tbe beart by tbe
vidhunvatá              effulgence of tbeir toenails!
pradarsaya sviyam            Kindly sbow me tbat form of Yours wbicb
apásta-sádhvasam            dissipates darkness in tbe beart of a devotee.
padarh guro marga-gurus        O guru\ You are tbe teacber of bhakti for us,
tamo-jusám               wbo are covered in ignorance!
53. Result of meditation on this form        ^ ^ i ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^
etad rüpam anudhyeyam         One who desires purif ication sbould meditate on
átma-suddhim   abhipsatám      this form.
yad-bhakti-yogo 'bhayadah      Devotion to tbis form gives freedom from fear of
sva-dharmam     anutisthatám   deatb, even to tbose practising varnasrama duties.
54-59: Bhakti is the topmost
54. You are obtainable by bhakti
bhaván bhaktimatá labhyo       You are easily attained by Your devotees,
durlabhah sarva-dehinam       but rarely attained by any living being.
svdrájyasyápy abhimata       Even Indra and Brabmá desire You (bhakti).
You are tbe ultimate destination of tbe Kumaras
ekdntenátma-vid-gatih
and otber knowers of dtmd.
55. Rarity of bhakti: Worsbipping Y o u is difficult (tarh durdrddhyam) even for
liberated souls (satdm api). It is possible (drddhya) only by pure devotional service
(ekdnta-bhaktyd), wbicb is very rare (durdpayd). Tberefore wbo would desire (ko
vdnchet) Svarga (bahih), wbicb is devoid of Your lotus feet (pdda-mülath vind)}
tarh durdrddhyam drddhya satdm api durdpayd
ekdnta-bhaktyd ko vdnchet pdda-mülarh vind bahih
56. Time (death) cannot touch a d e v o t e e "                      ^BWHIIIMÍIIIUPII-..
yatra nirvistam aranarh     Invincible time personified cannot approacb a soul
krtdnto ndbhimanyate       surrendered unto Your lotus feet,                   I
visvath vidhvarhsayan virya-   but tbat time vanquisbes tbe entire universe simply
saurya-visphürjita-bhruvd     by tbe expansion (quivering) of bis eyebrows.
4.24 Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva
57. Power o£ a devotee's association: Even half a moment's association with such a
devotee cannot be compared to Svarga or liberation (tbe results of karma and jnána).
ksanárdhenápi tulaye na svargam    nápunar-bhavam
bhagavat-sangi-sangasya martyánárh kim utásisah
L i n k : One who prays in this way will achieve devotee          association.
58. Association with devotees is Your real mercy
Tberefore, please give me tbe association
athanaghanghres tava kirti-tirthayor    of Your devotees, wbo are - (/)
antar-bahih-snána-vidhüta-pápmanám       completely purified by tbe famous Gahgá
arising from Your lotus feet,
(ii) are compassionate, (iii) bave proper
bhütesv        anukrosa-susattva-silinárh
conduct and pure bearts.
syát sangamo 'nugraha esa nas tava            Sucb association is Your real mercy
59. A devotee is unagitated and absorbed
A devotee's beart wbicb is purified by
na yasya cittarh bahir-artha-vibhramarh            bhakti is never agitated by objects of tbe
tamo-guháyám ca visuddham ávisat                 external energy (or fali asleep during
worship), wbicb is like a dark well.
Having been blessed by Bbakti-devi, be
yad-bhakti-yogdnugrhitam anjasa
understands very easily tbe Lord's
munir vicaste nanu tatra te gatim
name, fame, form and activities.
L i n k : However,    somé sages see Your form as Brahman. But that is You, since it is
Your effulgence spreading glory          everywhere.
60-66: Reiationship between the Lord and the Matériái Creation
60. B r a h m a n : Tbe all-pervading impersonal Brahman in wbicb tbe entire universe is
manifested, is Y o u .
6 1 . M a y a - L o r d - j i v a : Y o u create, maintain and destroy tbis universe repeatedly, by
Your mdyd, wbicb cannot bewilder Y o u . But living entities wbo are bewildered by
mdyd, tbink tbat tbis universe is separated from Y o u (bheda-buddhih). We pray to
realize Y o u , wbo are independent.
62. Universal f o r m : Your universal form consists of all five elements, tbe senses,
mind, intelligence, falsé ego and tbe Paramátmá. Karma-yogis and jhdna-yogis
worship Y o u by tbeir respective actions in tbeir respective positions.
[^mMjrMm.^:mM.tiMmtfj^M
Canto 4 Overview
6 3 . Mahá-visnu: Y o u are the originál person endowed with sleeping energy [supta-
sakti). When that matériái energy is agitated, the three modes act, and as a result the
totál matériái energy manifests.
Note: This matériái world is created to give facility to the living entities who want to
imitate the activities of the Lord. It is just like a mother giving toys to her children
who want to imitate her cooking in the kitchen. A child's play lasts for few hours and
the living entity's play lasts for many lifetimes.
6 4 . Paramátmá: After creation, Y o u enter it in four types of forms. Being within the
hearts of the living entities (as witness), Y o u know how they are enjoying their
senses, like bees enjoying honey from the honeycomh.
Note A : The four kinds of forms are born of - (/) an embryo {jaráyu-ja), (ii) eggs
{anda-ja), {iii) perspiration {sveda-ja) and {iv) seeds {udbhij-ja). Regardless of how
these living entities appear, they are all busy in their pursuit of sense enjoyment.
Note B: Humán society is like a beehive - Just as bees hite one another when trying
to enjoy honey, humans also suffer bites from other persons or nations while trying to
enjoy their hard earned money.
65-66:   T h e T i m e Factor:
Time causes everything to he
as one animál is eaten by another.
destroyed by something else
as the wind scatters the cíouds
Time scatters everything
in the sky.
Time suddenly strikes a greedy person [         as a snake seizes a mouse and very
desiring matériái objects                        easily swailows him
6 7 . Worship of Y o u r lotus feet: What intelligent person would reject Your lotus
feet, which Brahma worshipped out of fear of rehirth, and the fourteen Manus
worship with strong faith?
6 8 . Summary: Y o u are the goal of the wise and Y o u are death for the ignorant.
6 9 - 7 9 : LORD SIVA C O N C L U D E S AND PHALA-S'RUTI
6 9 - 7 1 : How to chant the Rudra-gíta to achieve auspicíousness
6 9 . Chant this prayer: M y dear Pracetas, perform your prescribed duties with pure
hearts, offering your minds to the Lord, and chant this prayer.
Note: "Perform your prescribed duties." This statement indicates that the Pracetas
had karma-misra-bhakti.
^éf^fíÍ''^^tíj^éÍ''^^éíj0                         4.24 Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva          |
7 0 . Worship the L o r d : Lord H a r i is in everyone's heart. Chant H i s glories, meditate
on H i m and worship H i m .
7 1 . Method: Studying it, contemplating it, being strong in vows, and concentrating
your intelligence, you should all chant this prayer repeatedly with great respect.
7 2 - 7 3 . Origin of the Rudra-gita: Brahma taught us this prayer, and ordered hy him
we created progeny. By chanting this prayer we destroyed our ignorance.
74-79:   Phala-sruti
7 4 . One becomes a devotee: By chanting this prayer, one attains the highest henefit
of hecoming a devotee of the Lord.
L i n k : Just to praise knowledge. Lord Siva says -
7 5 . Knowledge: Of all auspicious items in this world, knowledge is supremely
auspicious. By it one can cross over the ocean of nescience.
L i n k : However knowledge gives more difficulties and is not suitable as the boát to
cross samsdra. Therefore in this verse he speaks of bhakti.
7 6 . B h a k t i : Vibrating this song with faith (sraddhayd), one can please the Lord who
is rarely conquered.
7 7 . Anything desirable: A steady person attains the hest of whatever he desires from
singing my song (mad-gita-gttdt).
7 8 . Freedom from bondage: Hearing these prayers in the early morning and letting
other hear them certainly frees one from all hondage of karma.
79. Fquivalent to austerities: Recite these prayers with concentration, which are as
effective as great austerities, and in the end you will achieve your desired result.
Note: "You will attain your desired result," indicates that they had matériái desires.
Canto 4 Overview
ímm&mímmMmm
4 . 2 5 T H E DESCRIPTIONS O F THE
CHARACTERISTICS O F KING PURANJANA
1-2: Lord Siva disappears and the
Pracetas recite the Rudra-gíta
3-4: Narada goes to Prácinabarhisat and
1-8: Narada's       asks, "What do you gain hy karma?"
mercy on
Prácinabarhisat I     5-6: Prácinabarhisat requests for pure
knowledge admitting the misfortune of
grhamedhis
7-8: Narada shows the sacrificed animals;
in the sky
9-12: Puranjana searches for a suitable
place
9-24: Narada         13-19: Description of the city of nine
narrates the story                 gates (hody)
4.25
of Puranjana
Descriptions of                             20-24: Puranjana sees beautiful woman,
the                                        Puranjani and her description
Characteristics
25-31: Puranjana flatters the woman and
of King
25-44: A              requests her to hecome his wife
Puranjana            beautiful woman
32-42: Puranjani advocates pravrtti-
becomes
márga and discourages nivrtti-márga and
Puranjana's
happily agrees to hecome his wife
queen
43-44: Their enjoyment in the city
45-55: The gates
They represent the nine holes and other
and inhahitants
parts of the hody
of the city
56-62: Puranjana^
Puranjana fulfils all her desires, follows all
captivated hy his
her activities and becomes her pet animál
wife
1 - 8 : N A R A D A M U N I ' S M E R C Y O N PRÁCINABARHISAT
1 . L o r d Siva disappeared: After instructing the Pracetas in this way and being duly
worshipped hy them, Lord Siva disappeared.
2 . T h e Pracetas recited the Rudra-gita standing in the water for ten thousand years.
L i n k : While the Pracetas were undergoing austerities, their father Prácinabarhisat
was performing various fruitive activities. Narada decided to enlighten him, because
he was in the dynasty of the great Dhruva Mahdrája.
3 - 4 . Narada asks Prácinabarhisat: Compassionate Narada who was conversant of
the spiritual truth met Prácínaharhi who was attached to karma, and asked, " W h a t
do you desire to achieve by these karmas? It is not possihle to get rid of miseries
(duhkha-hdnih) and attain happiness (sukhdvdptih) by doing karma."
5 - 6 : Prácmabarhisat's request to Narada
5 . Instruct me i n pure knowledge: "Since my intelligence is entangled in karma, I do
not know the ultimate goal of life. Kindly instruct me in knowledge so that I can get
out of this entanglement.
6 . Misfortune of Grhamedhis
grhesu küta-dharmesu           One whose intelligence is fixed in the falsé occupa-
putra-ddra-dhandrtha-dhih       tional duties of househoid life, sons, wife, wealth, etc. i
na páram vindate müdho   does not attain liberation hut foolishly wanders in
bhrdmyan samsdra-vartmasu different hodies in matériái existence.
L i n k : In order to make Prdcinabarhi detached from fruitive activities, Ndrada, by his
power of yoga, showed him the sacrificial animals he had killed.
7 - 8 . Narada shows the sacrificed animals: "Please see in the sky those animals
which you have sacrificed without compassion. A l l these animals are awaiting your
death to revengefully pierce your hody with iron horns."
Note: Overindulgence in animál sacrifices is risky because as soon as there is a small
discrepancy, the slaughtered animál may not be promoted to a humán form of life.
Consequently, the person performing the sacrifice will be responsible for the death of
the animál (like a murderer).
9 - 2 4 : NÁRADA NARRATES THE STORY O F PURANJANA
9 . O l d story: In this connection I will narrate an old history of a king called
Purafijana (one who enjoys in a hody). Please understand it as I speak.
Canto 4 Overview
Note: This is an allegorical presentation. Because a person entangled in matériái
activities wants to hear stories of matériái activities, Narada Muni related the topics
of King Puranjana. He is however none other than King Prácinabarhisat himself.
1 0 . Brhat-srava and Avijnata: Puranjana's activities were celebrated (brhat-sravdh).
He had a friend named Avijnata (the Supersoul) whose activities were unknown.
Note: The eternal living entity is called brhat-sravdh because he is famous for his
activities, although they are performed in different types of bodies.
11-12. Search for a suitable place: Puranjana travelled all over the world to find a
suitable place to live for fulfilling his desires for sense gratification. But he could not
find a place of his liking and therefore became morose and disappointed.
Note: The living entity cannot be happy in any form of life or on any planet in the
matériái world {na anurüpam).
1 3 . City of nine gates: Once, while wandering, he saw on the southern side of the
Himalayas (in Bhárata-varsa) a city with nine gates with all auspicious facilities.
14-19: Description of the city of nine gates (matériái body)
Aspects of the city                       Comparison with the body
14      Walls {prdkdra)                           Skin
Parks{upavana)                            Hairs
Towers {attála)                           Highest parts like nose, bead
Trenches or canals {parikhaih)            Wrinkles and depressions
Windows {aksa)                            Eyes
Gates {toranaih)                          Eyelids
Houses {grhaih) with gold, silver and     3 modes or tri-dhdtus (mucus, bile and air)
iron domes
15      Capital of the state                      Heart
Floors made of sapphire, crystal,         Various desires and plans for matériái
diamonds, pearls, emeralds, rubies        enjoyment
16      Assembly house                            Heart (center of all remembrance,
forgetfulness and deliberation)
Street crossings                          Place below the palate where the passages
for the mouth, nose, eyes and ears meet.
Flags and festoons                        Palms and soles of feet
Streets                                   Susumna, idd, pingáld running down the
spiné
Gambling houses                           Gross location of the senses
Markét                                    Gross mind (brain)
Resting places                            Citta
mmmmmmmmmmmMmm
4.25Descript lons of the Characteristics of Puranjana
17   Beautiful trees and creepers encircling      Favourabie conditions surrounding the sex
a nice laké; groups of birds and bees        impulse
that were chanting and humming
18   Wind; waterfall; spring air                  Sparsa; different types of rasa; smell
19   Nonviolent animals                           No sinful reactions due to pious results
Cooing cuckoos attracting travellers to      Persons dividing their enjoyment amongst
rest in that nice garden                     family members, friends and guests.
20-24: Puranjana sees a beautiful woman, Puranjani
Aspects of Puranjani                        Represent
20   Purafijani                                  Intelligence functioning with ignorance
Arrived on her own (yadrcchayá              The initial relationship of the jiva with
ágatdm)                                     matéria! intelligence arises without cause
10 servants with hundreds of wives          10 senses with many desires
21   Protected by a five-hooded snake            Vitai life-force (prdna)
Beautiful and young, she appeared           Intelligence cannot act without consciousness
anxious to find a suitable husband
22   BeautifuUy decorated face                   Ways of acquiring knowledge
Beautiful nose                              Knowledge of smell
Beautiful teeth                             Ability to taste flavours and chew
Beautiful forehead                          Ciarity of intelligence
Beautiful ears with dazzling earrings       Ability to understand the meaning of scrip-
tures concerning enjoyment and liberation
23   Dark in complexion                          Intelligence covers the Lord for the jtva
Dressed in a yellow sdri and gold beit      Intelligence covered by actions in rajas
Two feet jingling with ankle bells          Intelligence unsteady in hearing scriptures
24   Two breasts:                                Rdga and dvesa
-Youthful           """"^                  Rdga and dvesa are always young
- Round, with no space in between          Equally bewildering
- She tried to hide them with the end      Cultured people try to hide rdga and dvesa
of her cloth out of shyness                (Even anarthas can be transfigured in bhakti)
25-44: A BEAUTIFUL W O M A N BECOMES PURANJANA'S Q U E E N
25. Purafijana got attracted by her eyebrows and smiling face and was pierced by
the arrows of her lusty desires. Although a hero (virah), he could not refrain from
addressing her.
:*\.5".K W\,5*_./W\,,5*.K %i\.?«jK •*\^;»_v*^
Canto 4 Ovmview        |   f ^ í f ? | ^
Note A: The jiva's freewill - The jiva is bound by ignorance (matériái intelligence)
by his own free will. The Lord doesn't bind him by force.
Note B: Two types of heroes - The jiva can be a great matéria! hero (victim of
máyd) or a great spiritual hero [gosvdmi who conquers the senses).
26-27.   Purafijana inquires to Puranjani: " M y dear lotus-eyed one,
(i)      Who are you?
(ii)      Where are you coming from?
(iii)      Whose daughter are you?
(iv)       What is the purpose of your coming here?
(v)       Who are your eleven strong bodyguards?
(vi)       Who are the women following them?
(vii)       Who is the snake that is preceding you?"
Note: In humán life, one should put questions to himself and to his intelligence.
2 8 . Who are you? "Are you Bhavánl or Sarasvati or Laksmí? Y o u are alone in the
forest, like a sage. Are you looking for your husband? I think you must be Laksmí,
but I do not see the lotus flower in your hand. Where did you throw the lotus?
Note: The lotus flower is the discerning power of the jiva. Everyone thinks that his
intelligence is perfect, but being bewildered, he doesn't know how to employ his
intelligence. Intelligence should be employed in the service of the Lord.
2 9 . Jóin w i t h me: Y o u are none of those women as your feet are touching the
ground. You can beautify this city along with me, a great hero and powerful king on
this planet, just as Laksmí, accompanied by Lord Visnu, decorates Vaikuntha.
3 0 . 1 am agitated: Your glances and shy smiles are agitating the most powerful cupid
within me. Therefore, please be merciful upon me!
Note: The jiva's impressions of sense objects, produced especially by intelligence,
attack him. He asks for enjoyment of sense objects such as sound and touch.
3 1 . Kindly show your face with nice eyebrows and eyes and with your bluish hair
scattered about. Y o u speak sweet words (valgu-vdcakam) but do not show me your
face out of shyness."
Note: Puranjana is attracted by avidyd. He now wishes to see the complete features
of avidyd (face). The face with beautiful features indicates form, taste, smell, touch
and sound. He prays to enjoy them.
3 2 . Puranjani also got attracted to Puranjana who was pleading to her in this way.
Thus she smilingly spoke to him.
Ö^I^'^AlMÍr^A^^                        ^     4.25 Descriptions of the Characteristics of Puranjana
3 3 . I do not know my name, who has hegotten me, my family, or the names and
origin of those accompanying me.
3 4 . I only k n o w that I am existing in this place today and nothing else. I do not
know who has created this residence.
Note: The living entity in this matériái world is ignorant and doesn't know his origin,
the purpose and the source of matéria! creation, and ultimately the Lord.
3 5 . M y associates: A l l these men (senses and mind) and women (desires) are my
friends, and the snake (vitai force), who always remains awake, protects this city
(body) even during my sleeping hours.
3 6 . We w i l l satisfy y o u : By great fortune, you have come here (attained a humán
hody). Y o u desire to satisfy your senses, and all my friends and I shall try our hest to
fulfil your desires.
3 7 . Y o u may live here in this city of nine gates for one hundred years and I will
arrange everything for your sense gratification.
3 8 . Others are incompetent: H o w can I expect to unité with others? Others are
neither conversant ahout sex nor capahle of knowing how to enjoy life while living or
after death. They are unahle to think of the future, like animals.
3 9 . Pravrtti-márga vs. nivrtti-márga: I n househoid life there is dharma, artha and
káma, the hliss of children, remnants of sacrifices and attainment of heaven. A l l this
happiness is practically unknown to the transcendentalists.
Note: Recommending only dharma, artha and káma and not moksa is ignorance.
4 0 . Pleasing househoid life: According to authorities, househoid life is pleasing not
only to oneself hut to the forefathers, demigods, great sages, and all humans.
4 1 - 4 2 . Y o u are a hero: Who will not accept a hushand like you - famous, generous,
handsome and affectionate with snake-like arms? Y o u relieve the distress of
unsheltered women like me hy your smiling glancé."
43-44. T h e i r enjoyment: Thus the two of them, through mutual understanding,
entered that city and enjoyed life for one hundred years. Praised hy singers and
surrounded hy women, Puranjana used to enjoy in the river, during the hot summer.
Note: The three states of Puranjana -
(i) Jágarti: His enjoyment for 100 years is his wakeful state.
(ii) Svapna: Playing with women is his dream state. Because the senses do not
function at this time, actions continue by their impressions (the women).
(iii) Susupti: He entered the river, the space in the heart, where the jiva resides
during deep sleep.
Canto 4 Overviev
Destination/       Accompanying
Holes of body ^ " ^ ^     Sense object         friend(s) É|
The seven gates on the surface (Five eastern, one northern and one southern)
Khadyotá       Left eye
(glow-worm)    (less powerful)               Vibhrájitam           Dyumán
Avirmukhl      Right eye                     (form)                (eye / Sun)
(torchlight)   (more powerful)
Nalini and     2 nostrils                    Saurabha
48                                                                        Avadhüta (nose)
Nálini             inhale, exhale and smell) (smell)
Bahüdana
Mukhyá         Mouth                                               Rasajfia (tongue)
49                                                  (eatables)
(chief gate)   (eating and speaking)                               Vipana (voice)
Apana (speech)
Right ear (for karnta-kdnda, Daksina-pancála
50     Pitrhü
elevates to Pitrloka)         (pravrtti scriptures)
Srutadhara (ear)
Left ear (for jndna-kánda,    Uttara-pancála
51     Devahü
higher planets above Svarga) (nivrtti scriptures)
The two subterranean gates (Western gates)
52      Ásuri          Genitals                       Gramaka (sex life)   Durmada (madness)
5 3 i Nirrti           Rectum                         Vaisasa (painful)    Lubdhaka (greed)
54-55:   Other inhabitants of the city
54. Nirvak and Pes'askrt (feet and hands): Purafijana used to go here and there and
perform activities with two blind men called Nirvak (feet) and Pesaskrt (hands).
55. Visúcina (mind): Sometimes he used to go to his antah-pura (heart) with Visücina
(mind). At that time, he experienced iilusion (tamás), satisfaction (sattva) and happiness
(rajas) from his wife (intelligence) and children (objects of intelligence such as
generalizing, particularizing, ascertaining and realizing).
5 6 - 6 2 : PURANJANA CAPTIVATED BY HIS W I F E
56. He fulfilled all her desires, being thus entangled in mentái speculation and fruitive
actions, being lusty (kdmdtmd), cheated (vancitah), and foolish (abudhah).
57-61. He foUowed her every move: He - drank, dined, chewed, sang, cried, laughed,
talked loosely, walked, stood still, lied down, sat, heard, saw, smelled, touched, lamented,
enjoyed and was satisfied - exactly following her.
62. Like a pet animál: Thus foolish Purafijana (ajnah) was cheated of his own nature.
Even against his desire, he remained under her control, just like a pet animál (kridd-mrga).
'mm:mmfmmmfmmfm:mmMí
, t/i   4.26 King Puranjana Goes to the Forest to Hunt
4 . 2 6 KING PURANJANA G O E S T G THE                  FOREIP
T G H U N T AND H I S Q U E E N BECOMES ANGRY
1-3: Puranjana
goes for hunting         Analogy - A jiva in the matériái body
on a chariot
4-5: Giving up his wife, Puranjana goes to
hunt and kills animals
J
6-8: Scriptural regulations on animál killing;
4-10: Puranjana         Followers and non-followers of scriptures
hunts in the
forest           9: Merciful people could not tolerate animál
4.26 King                                             killing
Puranjana
Goes to                             10: After killing many animals, Purafijana
becomes tired
the Forest
to Hunt,                          11-13: Puranjana gets refreshed, takes rest, I
and his                          decorates himself and searches out his wife
Queen
Becomes     11-20: Puranjana      14-16: Purafijana asks the househoid women
returns home                         about his wife
Angry
17-20: The women show the queen lying on i
the ground and Purafijana tries to appease her
21-22: Punishment of master is mercy on the
servant
2 3 : Give up your anger and show your
21-26: Puranjana!                      beautiful face
pacifies his wife
2 4 : 1 will punish anyone w h o has offended I
you except for a bráhmana and a Vaisnava j
25-26: Please show your kindness to me
I         Canto 4 Overview               #^ííWlÍWIf^'tt^ff^'íí^tfWi^
L i n k : 4.26 describes how the jiva sometimes gives up his proper intelligence under the
influence of tamás and becomes attached to forbidden objects, and how he regains
that discrimination later.
1 - 3 : PURANJANA G O E S T O H U N T O N HIS CHARIOT
( A N A L O G Y - A JÍVA IN T H E M A T É R I Á I B O D Y )
1-3. Once upon a time King Puranjana went to the forest, mounting his chariot.
Features of the chariot                     Represented by
Puranjana                                   Soul
Chariot                                     Body
Bow                                         Ahsorption in heing the doer and enjoyer
Puranjana's golden armour; the              Rajo-guna
chariot's golden decorations
Quiver of unlimited arrows                  Infinite matériái desires
2 explosive arrows                          Ego (ahantd) and possessiveness (mamatd)
5 arrows                                    5 activities of the jhdnendriyas
5 horses (moving quickly)                   5 jndnendriyas (easily attracted hy senses)
2 wheels                                    Sinful and pious activities
Revolving axle                              Fradhdna
3 flags                                     3 modes of nature
5 supports                                  5 life airs [prdna, apdna, uddna, samdna, vydna)
^^^"^ __________                            Mind
Driver                                      Intelligence
Sitting place                               Heart
2 poles to which harness is fixed           Lamentation and iilusion (causes of hondage)
7 coverings                                 7 dhdtus (skin, muscle, fat, hlood, marrow, hone
and semen)
5 different motions of the chariot          5 activities of the karmendriyas
5 ohstacles (uneven roads)                  5 kinds of air passing within hody - prdna, apdna,
uddna, samdna, vydna)
11 commanders                               10 senses and the mind (leader)
Destination (the forest named               5 sense ohjects
Panca-prastha)
'^^iijWa^^^i^.^^íi íS^lLÖ                            "^-2^ "^'"S Puranjana Goes to the Forest to Hunt
4 - 1 0 : PURANJANA HUNTS IN T H E FOREST
( T H E JÍVA PERFORMING FORBIDDEN A C T S UNDER IGNORANCE)
4. Desire to hunt: Giving up the company of his wife with difficulty, Puranjana
proudly took up his how and arrow and went to the forest, inspired to hunt.
Note: Hunting here represents woman-hunting. Giving up his wife represents giving
up religious principles for sense gratification. The bow and arrow represent
attachment and hatred.
5. Influenced by demoniac propensities, his heart became very hard and merciless,
and without consideration he killed wild animals with his sharp arrows.
L i n k : If the king was allowed to hunt according to scripture, why should the living
entity be restricted from sense gratification?
6. Scriptural regulations on animál killing: If a king is too attracted to eating flesh,
he may do so hut -
(i)   as per scriptural directions for special sraddha rites {tirthesu)
(ii)   only animals suitahle for sacrifice should he killed (medhydn pasün)
(iii)   it should he done only in the forest [vane)
(iv)    only as much as required (ydvad-artham)
Note: Similarly a jiva is allowed to enjoy the sense objects as much as necessary, but
not to the fullest extent.
L i n k 6 ^ 7-8: Result of following and not following the regulations of scriptures.
7. Follower of scriptural restrictions: Any learned person who works according to
the knowledge of the Vedic scriptures {jndnena) is not contaminated [na sa lipyate)
hy his activities and their reactions.
8 . Non-follower of scriptural restrictions
anyathd karma kurvdno             One who acts whimsically (unrestrictedly)
mdndrüdho nibadhyate            is influenced hy pride and hound hy those actions.
-             '                                                                               -1
guna-pravdha-patito           Thus he falls down hy the influence of the gunas,
nasta-prajno vrajaty adhah        loses his intelligence, and sinks down into samsdra.
9. M e r c i f u l people were aggrieved and could not tolerate Puranjana's ghastly killing
of so many animals.
10. Puranjana killed many animals like rahhits, hoars, huffalos, wild cows, antelopes
and porcupines, suitahle for sacrifice. Thus he hecame tired.
tv
M
Canto 4 Overview
11 -26: PURANJANA RETURNS H O M E AND A P P E A S E S H I S AGGRIEVED W I F E
Puranjana's activity                         Spiritual Significance
11    Being hungry and thirsty,                    He was trouhled on rememhering his
sinful acts.
he returned Jiome,                            He gave up sinful acts and established
himself in dharma.
took bath,                                   He called bráhmanas and had them
perform atonements.
ate suitable food,                           He gave up taking meat and liquor.
and being refreshed, took rest.              He was somewhat steady.
12    He decorated himself with ornaments,         These decorations are compared to
sandalwood pulp and garlands.                knowledge of religion and the self.
After this, he remembered his Queen.          Returning to his previous condition, he
remembered his intelligence fixed in
dharma.
13    He felt satisfied, joyful and proud           His impressions of sinful life left him.
and his mind was enamoured hy                 He hecame eager to find his previous
Cupid,                                        intelligence fixed in dharma.
hut he did not see his beautiful wife.        Though one desires one's previous
intelligence to act according to dharma,
it does not appear immediately.
14    Puranjana saw the househoid women             The women are the actions of the antah-
karana in their previous condition,
inclined to dharma. They suddenly
appeared.
and asked them, "Are you and your             He considered, " I f the actions of my
mistress all happy like hefore, or not?       intelligence remain steady, they can
deliver me hy destroying my present
impressions of sin." Thus he asked how
they are.
15    "Now the wealth of the house no more          The forbidden ohjects no longer give
attracts me. If there is no mother or         pleasure. The mother here is bhakti to
wife in the house, what learned man           Visnu. The wife is intelligence endowed
would remain there?                           with dharma.
4.26 King Puranjana Goes to the Forest to Hunt
16   "Where is she who saves me by giving         The actions of the intelligence (the       |
me good intelligence at every step,          queen's assistants) are not so helpful. He j
when I am drowning in the ocean of           laments that they are not the intelligence !
danger?"                                     itself.
17   The women said, "We do not know              Her bed made of flowers represents the
why your dear wife is lying on the           heart on which the intelligence endowed
ground without bedding."                     with dharma lies.
18   Seeing his queen lying on the ground,        He thought, " I committed a great
appearing like a mendicant, he               offense." Being anxious to associate
immediately hecame bewildered.               with her again, he deprecated his
foolishness.
19   He pacified her with sweet words             When one regrets his sinful acts of
filled with regret.                          ahandoning Krsna consciousness and
good intelligence, his path of deliverance
is opened.
20   Puranjana, heing expert in flattery,         He said, "From today I will no longer
slowly appeased her.                         use my intelligence for enjoying
sinfully."
First he touched her two feet,               Her two feet represent giving up
ahankára and respecting the devotees.
then he emhraced her on his lap and          He put her back in his heart.
spoke as follows:
21-26: Puranjana pacifies his Queen
21   " A n unfortunate servant is not             A devotee thinks, "The Lord Himself
punished hy his master for his               has punished me to teach me. I will not
offences." (But you have punished me         give up my proper intelligence again."
hy your anger.)
22   " A master's chastisement should he          A devotee thinks, "This punishment is
accepted as great mercy hy the               the highest mercy for me, for I will not
servant. Only a fool would hecome            hecome attached to sin again."
angry.
23   "Please give up your anger and show          A devotee prays, "That is certainly my
your beautiful face. Your sweet words,       previous intelligence. May she hecome
smiling glances and hlue hair attract        favourabie and steady!"
me.
Canto 4 Overview
:i£M£^d:W:md!f:m£^dirm
24   " O hero's wife, I will punish anyone if   Puranjana represents Pracinabarhi, and
he has offended you, except for a          Narada Muni was reminding him of his
bráhmana (bhüsura-kulat) and a             forefather, Mahárája Prthu, who never
Vaisnava (mura-ripoh ddsdt).               chastised a brdhmana or a Vaisnava
(4.21.12). The only relief from offending
such persons is their mercy.
25   " I never saw you like this hefore:        This condition indicates that the
Your face without tilaka, morose and       intelligence was not pleased as she
dull without affection; breasts soaked     formerly was.
with tears; lips without red hue.
26   "Thinking of me as your intimate           Just as a woman does not give up her
subordinate, be kind to me, who has        lover who has done wrong, the dharmic
offended you by going to the forest.       intelligence should not give up the jiva.
Being pierced by the arrow of Cupid, I
am feeling lusty. Which woman would
not embrace her husband, being under
her control?"
WMj^a'^J^tí^^'éÍ       ^fflíliS          4.27 Attack by Candavega on the City of Purafijana
4 . 2 7 ATTACK BY CANDAVEGA O N THE CITY OF
PURANJANA; THE CHARACTER O F KÁLAKANYÁ
1-5: Puranjana
Overwhelmed by iilusion, Purafijana
enjoys with his
enjoys with his wife and thus his
queen, forgetting
youth passed
time
6-10: Purafijana's sons, daughters
and grandsons hecome plunderers
of his wealth and he becomes
6-12: Expansion of                        attached to them
Puranjana's family;
4.27             His old age                  11-12: Puranjana gets implicated by|
Attack by                                          his desires (like Prácínaharhi) and i
Candavega                                         performs sacrifices; He attains old 1
on the                                                            age                I
City of
The five-hooded serpent fights with j
Puranjana;       13-18: C a n d a v e g a !
Candavega and his 720 Candharva j
The          attacks Purafijana's r
soldiers for 100 years and becomes!
city             I
Character of 1                                                    weak
Kálakanyá
19-20: No one agreed to accept
Jará, but once Püru accepted her
21-22: Jara curses Narada for
19-30: The story                       refusing her proposal
of Kálakanyá, the
daughter of                    23-27: By the advice of Nárada, |
Candavega                    she approaches Bhaya (Yavana-rája):
and proposes
28-30: Bhaya accepts her as both
sister and wife
Canto 4 Overview
w    Purafijana's activity
Enjoyed: After bewildering her hushand
Spiritual Significance
Giving up the inclination for sinful
and hringing him under her control,            life, the jiva becomes attached to
Puranjani gave him all satisfaction and        dharmic intelligence as hefore.
enjoyed with him.
Welcomed: The king welcomed his                Seeing the happiness of his dharmic
satisfied queen who approached him,            intelligence, and heing freed from the
having hathed and dressed nicely.              contaminations in his mind, he felt
successful.
Captivated: Emhraced hy the queen and          He lost his intelligence for crossing
attracted hy her priváté talks, King           samsdra.
Puranjana hecame captivated hy her and
could not realize the passing of time.
lUusioned: In this way, Puranjana              His wife here represents dharma.
always remained in the arms of his wife        Associating with dharma, he hecame
and could not understand the meaning of        attached to dharma, and that hecame
self-realization, neither as the jiva nor as   the goal of this life, rather than
the Lord.                                      liberation.
5 . Y o u t h passed: In this way Puranjana, with his heart full of lust, hegan to enjoy sex
with his wife, and his youth passed away in half a moment.
6 - 1 2 : PURANJANA'S FAMILY LIFE
6-7. Sons and daughters: I n his wife he heget 1,100 sons and 110 well-qualified
daughters, who gave fame to their parents. In this husiness he passed half his life.
8 . Marriages: T o increase the descendants of his paternal family, he got his sons
married with qualified wives and his daughters married with qualified hushands.
9. Grandchildren: Each son produced hundreds and hundreds of sons. In this way
the whole city of Pancala hecame overcrowded hy his descendants.
Note: Pancála-desa refers to the field of activities where the jiva enjoys sense objects.
Actions and reactions the jiva generates are represented by sons and grandsons.
10. Plunderers: Puranjana's sons and grandsons were virtually plunderers of his
home, treasury, servants, secretaries, etc. His attachment to them was deep-rooted.
4.27 Attack by Candavega on the City of Puranjana
11. Implicated by desires: King Puranjana hecame implicated in so many desires, just
like ycu (Pracinabarhi). He worshipped the demigods, forefathers and social leaders
with various animál sacrifices.
Note: Nárada now openly discloses to King Prácinabarhisat that the character of
Puranjana is actually him. The meaning was hidden only to teach him hy example.
12. Old age: Being attached to fruitive activities and family {kutumba ásakta-
cetasah), Purafijana eventually arrived at that point disliked hy those overly attached
to women [apriyah priya-yositdm).
1 3 - 1 8 : ' € A N p A v r c A M T A C K S PURANJANA'S C I T Y
13-14. Candavega and Gandharva soldiers attack: The Gandharva King Candavega
and his 360 powerful Gandharva soldiers, each with a female Gandharvi companion,
surrounded and plundered Puranjana's city huilt for his sense gratification.
Characteri                                  Represents
Candavega                                   Time (year)
Gandharvas                                  Days (360)
Gandharvis                                  Nights (360)
White pairs of Gandharvas                   Waxing phase of the moon
Black pairs of Gandharvas                   Waning phase of the moon
Candavega and his followers                 From birth, every day one's
surrounded the city and plundered it        life span is stolen by time    j
15-16. Five-hooded serpent defends: When Candavega and his followers began to
plunder the city, a five-hooded serpent (the life air) who was the superintendent of
the city {purddhyaksa), hegan to defend the city. He fought alone with the 720
Gandharvas for one hundred years.
17. A n x i e t y of the king and citizens: Seeing that the serpent had hecome weak from
fighting alone with many powerful soldiers, the king and the citizens hecame very
anxious.
18. T h e king's ignorance: King Purafijana fearlessly enjoyed sexual indulgence in the
city, along with his followers, hy coUecting taxes from the five provinces [pancdla:
five sense ohjects). He was completely controUed hy women and unahle to
understand death approaching.
L i n k : Now the entrance of old age (Jard) is described through a story.
mímiiM^MmmmtimMmtimimf
Canto 4 Overview    'ÍJÍÍIOKOOÍJÍÍIÍ^^
19. Seeking a husband: At this time Kálakanyá (Jará or old age), the daughter of
Candavega (Time) was seeking her husband throughout the three worlds, hut no one
agreed to accept her.
20. Pleased with Püru: Because she hrought misfortune, she was known as Durhhagá
(ill-fated). However, once a great king (Püru) accepted her, and heing pleased, she
granted him a great henediction.
Note: The henediction is that when Yayáti was satisfied with his son Püru for
accepting his old age, he gave him the kingdom. (Ref. SB 9.18)
21. Proposes to Nárada: She met me once when I (Nárada) came to this earth from
Brahmaloka. Knowing that I was a brahmacart, she hecame lusty and proposed that I
accept her.
22. Curses Nárada: When I refused, she hecame very angry and cursed me that I
would not he ahle to stay in one place for a long time.
23. Approaches Bhaya: Disappointed hy me, hut taking my advice, she approached
Bhaya, the king of the Yavanas, and chose him as her hushand.
Note: Narada's desire in sending Bhaya to Yavana-rája was: "Let peoples' fear he
weakened by the influence of old age."
24-26: Kálakanyá (old age) to Bhaya (fear)
24. " I desire you, the hest of the Yavanas. I accept you as my desired hushand, for I
know that no one is haffled if he makes friends with you.
25. T w o types of ignorant people are lamentahle {dváv imdv attusocattti) according
to common understanding (yal loka) and the scriptures (sdstra upanatath): (i) those
who do not give charity and (//) those who do not accept charity.
26. Show compassion: Therefore, he merciful to me and accept me. It is a
gentleman's greatest duty to he compassionate upon a person who is distressed."
27. Hearing this, Bhaya, desiring to execute the Lord's confidential duty, spoke to
Kálakanyá while smiling.
Note: The Lord's desire was to put the wheel of samsdra into motion.
28-30: Bhaya to Kálakanyá
28. People don't welcome y o u : "After much consideration, I have decided on a
hushand for you, although you are actually inauspicious and no one wants to accept
you.
29. Attack and k i l l people: This world is a product of fruitive activities {karma-
vinirmítam). Therefore you may imperceptibly attack people in generál. With the
help of my soldiers, you can kill them without opposition.
Note: Yavana-rája indicated that the karmis of the world will be her husband. After
enjoying them, she will destroy them. But she should not approach the devotees of the
Lord, just like she could not approach Nárada.
30. Sister and wife: Here is my brother Prajvara. Y o u hecome my sister. I shall
employ both of you, as well as my dangerous soldiers, to act imperceptibly within this
world."
Note: To make Nárada's words true, Yavana-rája accepted Kálakanyá as his wife and
also as a sister.
Character                              Represents
Kála-kanyá (Daughter of time           Jará (old age), Durbhaga (ill-fate)
Yavanesvara (Bhaya)                    Fear, Mrtyu (death)
Prajvara                               Visnu-jvára (fever sent by Visnu):
2 types - hot and cold (typhoid, pneumonia)
Soldiers of Yavana-raja                Diseases {ádhydtmika, ddhibhautika, ddhidaivika)
3*x.,53.*-#X.,5«1J.'Wv^yl.K'«*v^5»j,. W\^5I^
Canto 4 i
4 . 2 8 PURANJANA BECOMES A W O M A N IN THE NEXT LIFE
1-17: Prajvara, Kálakanyá and the soldiers i
of Bhaya attack Puranjana's city.
Puranjana becomes miserable. The city's
superintendent, five-hooded serpent
couldn't defend and wished to leave the
1-27: Puranjana's                        city.
death
18-22a: Puranjana's lamentation about
wife and children
22b-27: Attacked by Bhaya, Puranjana
dies and after death animals attack him.
28-32: Puranjana
Marriage of Vaidarbhí and Malayadhvaja,
becomes
and their descendants
Vaidarbhí
4.28
Puranjana            33-42:
Becomes a                               Malayadhvaja performed austerities,
Malayadhvaja and
realized the Lord and left his body.
Woman ín         Vaidarbhí rétire
The Next
Life         43-50: Instructions   Vaidarbhi lamented for the death of her
for a disciple from   husband and arranged for a funeral pyre
her example               and prepared to enter it.
51-55: Avijnata asks whether she
remembered her old friend
56-58: City of nine gates represent the
matériái body
51-65: Avijnáta
(Lord) instructs
59-64: By M y máyá, you are thinking
Vaidarbhí
differently, but you are qualitatively one
with me
6 5 : Narada reveals Pracinabarhi that he
instructed through an allegory.
*t'áí ' t ^ í H Í i ' t T T í í V          t t ^ j T á í t T í ^ i 'IAÍ      4.28 Puraniana Becomes a Woman in the Next Life
K.Tg.^éAv      *•> . ^ é é v . . . * * . . é é x   ».» Léév,»g    .^éé~_                |1M-^-».-k—.-—....KK.,-.....-.-..-
1 - 2 7 : PURANJANA'S DEATH
1 - 1 7 : Attack by Prajvara, Kálakanyá and the Yavanas on Puranjana's city
I . Travels of the trio: Afterwards, Prajvara, Kálakanyá and the soldiers of Bhaya
(the Yavanas) began to travel all over the earth.
2- 3 . Attack on the city: Once, they forcefuUy attacked Puranjana's city, which was
full of paraphernalia for sense gratification and was being protected by an old serpent
(his worn out life airs). Kálakanyá took possession of that city and rendered all the
inhabitants useless for all purposes.
4 . T h e Yavanas entered the city through the gates on all sides and began to afflict
the entire city. (The diseases entered through the eyes and other openings.)
5. Puranjana's pain: When the city was thus endangered, King Purafijana, heing
attached to his family and its possessions, underwent a great variety of pains.
6 . Weakened: Being emhraced hy Kálakanyá, he gradually lost his heauty. Having
heen addicted to sex, he lost his intelligence and opulence, and was forcibly
conquered hy them.
7. Indifferent associates: Then, he saw that everything in his town was scattered,
and his sons, grandsons, followers, ministers and wife had hecome indifferent.
8 . A n x i e t y : Seeing this situation, Purafijana hecame very anxious. Yet, he was not
ahle to counteract Kálakanyá's attack.
9. Kálakanyá's influence made all the ohjects of enjoyment stale for him. Lusty
desires made him poor. Thus he lost his real purpose of life hut still wanted to
maintain his family affectionately.
1 0 . Even against his desire, he was forced to leave the city, which was smashed hy
Kálakanyá and overcome hy the Gandharvas and Yavanas.
I I . Prajvára set fire to the city to please his younger brother Bhaya.
1 2 . Effects of the fire: When the city was set ahlaze, the king along with his citizens,
servants, wife, and descendants, hegan to suffer the heat of the fire.
Note: Various bodily parts such as the senses, limbs, and dhátus are figuratively
represented as servants, sons, grandsons, dependants and citizens.
1 3 . Serpent aggrieved: The city's superintendent, the serpent, hecame very aggrieved
to see his own ahode set ahlaze hy Prajvára.
1 4 . T h e serpent wished to leave the city, due to great suffering and heing unahle to
protect the city, just as a snake desires to leave a hollow tree which is set on fire.
^^^H              Canto 4 Overview     '^'ÍftSírATtJíril^^
15. Loud cries: When his limbs were weakened by the Gandharvas and his strength
stolen hy the Yavanas, his throat hecame choked up, and he hegan to cry loudly.
16-17. Attachments: Being overly attached to the conceptions of " 1 " and "mine,"
Puranjana hecame miserable at the impending separation from his wife and hegan to
think of his daughters, sons, grandsons, house, wealth, etc.
1 8 - 2 2 a : Puranjana's lamentation about his wife and cbildren
18. A n x i e t y about wife: He was anxiously thinking, "When I die, how will my wife
he ahle to maintain all the children and other family members?
19. Remembrance of past dealings with wife
•   She wouldn't eat or hathe unless I did.
•   She was so devoted to me that if I hecame angry and scolded her, she would
remain silent in fear and tolerate me.
•   She would instruct me when I was foolish.
•   When I was away, she would lament.
•   Having many sons, how will she he ahle to perform the househoid duties?
21. A n x i e t y about progeny: After my death, how will my sons and daughters
continue their lives, heing fuUy dependent on me? Their position will he like that of
the passengers on a shattered hoat in the midst of the ocean."
22a. Unbefitting lamentation: The king's lamentation was not befitting yet he did so
out of miserly intelligence (krpanayd buddhyá).
22b-27: Puranjana's deatb
22b-23. Bhaya approached to arrest him at that time. When the Yavanas were taking
him to their ahode and hinding him like an animál, the king's followers (various life
airs) lamented and were forced to go along with him.
24. As soon as the snake left the city, the city was dismantled and smashed to dust.
25. As the king was heing dragged forcibly hy the Yavanas, heing in ignorance, he
could not remember his friend and well-wisher (the Supersoul).
26. The unkind king had killed many animals in various sacrifices. Remembering
these, all those animals began to pierce him with their horns like axes.
27. Prolonged suffering: Because of contaminated association with women (pramadá
-sanga-düsitah) and being bereft of intelligence, the king suffered all the pangs of
matériái existence for many many years (sásvatt samáh) and remained in darkness.
ananta-pdre tamási magnó nasta-smrtih samdh
sdsvatir anubhüydrtim pramadd-sanga-düsitah
4.28 Puranjana Becomes a Woman in the Next Life
V
2 8 - 3 2 : PURANJANA BECOMES PRINCESS VAIDARBHÍ IN HIS NEXT LIFE
28. Woman birth: Purafijana died while remembering his wife, and consequently, in
the next life he was born as the beautiful daughter of the king of Vidarhha.
29. Malayadhvaja, the best of the learned (pandyah) and the conqueror of enemy
cities (para-purahjayah), after defeating other kings in battle, married (upayeme) the
daughter of the King Vidarhha, as prize for his chivalry (vtrya-panám).
Note: Bhakti arises from the association of devotees, by their spontaneous mercy.
That is shown in Puranjana's next life as Vaidarbhi, where he attained the association
of a devotee thiough martiage. The following are the real meanings of the terms.
Term               Real meaning
King               The best (dhvaja) among the devotees, who are equal to the
Malayadhvaja       Malaya mountain rangé, and similarly worthy of worship.
upayeme            Accepting to be a student
para-puranjayah He who cut the doubts arising from other philosophies
virya-pandm     He had great mercy as his power (virya).
30. Progeny: Malayadhvaja hegot in Vaidarbhi, a daughter, who had very hlack eyes
(asiteksand) and seven younger sons who hecame kings of the seven southern
provinces.
Note A: Daughter - Asiteksand means who received the glancé of Krsna (asita) or
one who has a taste for serving Krsna, which is developed hy the mercy of a guru.
Note B: Sons - The seven sons are sravanam, kirtanam,    dásyam. Because
sakhyam and dtma-nivedanam are difficult in the beginning, and will appear
spontaneously later, they are not mentioned.
31. Further descendants: These seven sons gave hirth to thousands of sons, whose
descendants protected the entire world for the rest of Manu's life and after.
Note: Many sons indicates that the processes like sravanam can each be suhdivided
into innumerable categories, in different ways like - (i) hearing the name, the
pastimes, or the qualities of the Lord, (ii) according to worship of different avatdras,
(iii) according to different rasas. Their descendants are the four different
sampradáyas. They ruled the whole earth. This means that the earth was protected
from ignorance and materialistic karma-yoga.
32. Daughter's descendants: Sage Agastya (mind) married Asiteksaná (taste for
Krsna). From her, Drdhacyuta (devoid of attachment) was horn. From Drdhacyuta,
Idhmaváha (one who- carries firewood for sacrifice/ is surrendered to guru) was horn.
Canto 4 Overview        #'ÍIÍ*2í'ÍÍ^Őí"ÍÍ*^^^
33. Malayadhvaja retired and went to Kulácala (a place for bhakti) to worship Lord
Krsna with full attention, after dividing his kingdom among his sons.
Note: When his disciples are grown up and able to preach, the spiritual master should
rétire and sit down in a solitary place to write and execute nirjana-bhajana.
34. Vaidarbhi foUowed him like the moonshine follows the moon at night [jyotsneva
rajani-karam). Being a devoted wife, she gave up the house, children and enjoyments.
Note A : When the spiritual master retires for nirjana-bhajana, somé of his advanced
devotees may foUow him and engage in his personal service.
Note B: Here Vaidarbhi is called madireksand. Madireksand refers to one whose eyes
are intoxicated upon seeing the Deity.
35-36. Malayadhvaja's austerities: At Kulácala the king purified himself by bathing
daily in the rivers Candravasa, TámraparnI and Vatodaká. Subsisting on roots, seeds,
fruits, flowers, leaves, grass and water, his body gradually became emaciated.
37. Conquered dualities: Through austerity, he gradually conquered the dualities of
cold and heat, wind and rain, hunger and thirst, pleasant and unpleasant conditions,
happiness and distress.
38. F i x e d mind: By austerity, knowledge, niyama and yama, he conquered his senses,
life airs and consciousness and fixed his mind on Brahman (Vásudeva).
39. R a t i for Vásudeva: For one hundred celestial years he remained fixed in one
place. Then, he developed rati for Vásudeva and was not aware of anything else.
40. Soul vs. Supersoul: He attained perfect knowledge hy heing ahle to distinguish
the all-pervasive Supersoul from the localized individual soul. He understood that the
soul is the witness of the matériái hody and different from it.
41-42. Enlightenment: Being directly instructed by the Lord {sdksdd bhagavatoktena)
as caitya-guru (gurund harind), he developed transcendental knowledge by which
(visuddha-jhdna-dípena) he could - (i) understand everything from all angles of
vision (visvato-mukham), (ii) observe the Supersoul and the soul (himself) sitting side
by side together without separate interests, (iii) abstain from all matériái activities.
Note: When a devotee is serious and sincere, the Lord gives directions from within.
^fíV'^H         'tSTií *&féí                         Í A I H Í Í 'i©   4.28 Puranjana Becomes a Woman in the Next Life
.-ii»iuii.wipi.i,i,miip.ii..iu.iiiii^ij»pii^                                               I   u
j mm
43. Attitűdé: Vaidarhhi, accepting her hushand as the Supreme, served her hushand
with devotion giving up all enjoyment.
Note: Figuratively, Malayadhvaja is the spiritual master, and his wife, Vaidarhhi, is
the disciple. The disciple accepts the spiritual master as the Supreme Lord.
44. Steadiness: I n old garments, she was lean due to austerity, and her hair was
matted. Though always near her husband, she was silent like the flame of an
undisturbed fire.
Note: If a disciple remains steady in serving his spiritual master, he need no longer
fear falling down into the clutches of maya.
45. Service: She continued to sérve her hushand unaware of his passing away.
46. Separation: Not feeling the warmth of his feet, she understood that he had
passed away. Thus, she felt exactly like a deer separated from its mate.
47-49: Lamentation
47. Being now alone and a widow in the forest, she lamented, incessantly shedding
tears and crying very loudly.
Note: When the mortal body of the spiritual master expires, his disciples should cry
exactly like this. However, a disciple is never separated from the spiritual master in
spite of his physical (vapuh) absence, as long as he follows his instructions (váni).
48. She said, " O hest of kings, please get up! You must protect this frightened world
surrounded hy the seas from thieves and falsé kings."
Note: " O guru\ Protect this earth in which you established bhakti, which is now
frightened by those opposing bhakti."
49. Lamenting in the forest, she feli down at the feet of her dead hushand and hegan
to cry pitifully and shed tears.
50. Saha-marana: She placed the dead hody upon the funeral pyre. Lamenting
severely, she prepared herself to enter the fire with her hushand.
Note: A devoted disciple would rather die with the spiritual master than fail to
execute his mission [or] To execute the will of the spiritual master, the disciple should
he prepared to lay down his life and abandon all personal considerations.
!*x.
Canto 4 Overview         **xiJ€,x*é\,Jf,/éé'H.»f ,y«Mj;,/i*Kt3€,xW
5 1 - 6 5 : AVIJNATA (THE L O R D ) INSTRUCTS VAIDARBHÍ
51. A r r i v a l : One bráhmana, who was an old friend (avijnáta) of King Puranjana,
came there and began to pacify the queen with sweet words.
Note: Why did the Lord not appear in His originál form as Sri Krsna? - Unless one is
very highly elevated in loving the Lord, one cannot see Him as He is. But when one
becomes serious to foUow the mission of the spiritual master, his resolution is
tantamount to seeing the Supreme Lord.
52. I am your friend: "Who are you? Who is this man lying here, for whom you
lament? Don't you recognize Me, your eternal friend, whom you consulted many
times?
53. Y o u left M e : Don't you remember that in the past you had a very intimate friend
(avijháta-sakham sakhe)} Unfortunately, you gave up M y company (hitvá mám
padam anvicchan) and accepted a position as enjoyer of this matériái world (bhauma-
bhoga-rato gatah).
Note: The natural position of the living entities is to lovingly sérve the Lord. When
they desire to enjoy themselves like Krsna by misusing their minute independence,
they develop a consciousness of duality and come to hate the Lord's service and fali
into the matériái world.
L i n k : " I don't remember. Please remind me."
54. T w o swans: We both are like two swans living together in the Mánasa Laké (the
heart) for many thousands of years. Yet we are far away from our originál home (the
spiritual world).
55. Wanderings: Leaving Me, with matériái consciousness (grámya-matir) you went
to the earth and wandering about you saw a place (the matériái body or matériái
world) created by somé woman (striyá or máyá).
56-58. Matéria! body: The description of that city allegorically represents the body:
Places                    Description of the Body
5 gardens                 5 sense objects
9 gates                   9 openings of the body
1 guard                   Life air                         i
3 apartments              Earth, water and fire            I
6 families                5 knowledge senses and mind
5 Stores                  5 action senses
5 powers of state         5 gross elements
1 mistress                 Intelligence
1 master (husband)        Jtva
59. Entanglement: Having entered such a place (the body) along -with the woman of
matériái desires, you have hecome absorbed in sense enjoyment and without hearing
about knowledge of the self {asruta-smrtih), you have attained this sinful condition
(pápiyasíth).
L i n k : Ifi have never heard knowledge of the self, then teli me what I should know.
60. Falsé identities: Actually, you are not the daughter of Vidarhha, nor the wife of
this well-wishing friend, nor the husband of Puranjani, who kept you in the city of
nine gates (the body).
Note: You are not the daughter of anyone hut are the cit-sakti jiva heionging to me. I
am your real well-wishing friend. You are not the husband of Puranjani, but the
conscious partiele covered with ignorance.
L i n k : If this is so, why am I not aware of all this?
6 1 . Máyá: This máyá has been created by Me (máyá hy esá mayá srstá) and causes
you think yourself a woman, man or eunuch. But actually we are both pure spiritual
identities.
62. Qualitative oneness: I , the Supersoul, and you, the individual soul, are not
different in quality. Learned persons do not find any qualitative difference between
us.
63. Quantitative difference: Although one sees his reflection in a mirror to be
himself, others actually see two bodies. Similarly, there is a difference between God
and the living entity.
Note: The Supreme Lord is full, powerful and opulent and is eternally alipta,
uncontaminated by máyá. The conditioned soul, however is lipta (contaminated),
being in contact with matéria! nature and forgetting his real identity.
64. Revival: In this way, one swan, after being instructed by the other, regained his
originál Krsna consciousness, which was lost because of his aversion to the Lord [tad-
vyabhicárerta).
65. Thus I have given spiritual instructions indirectly through an allegory, since the
Lord can be known indirectly [or] He is fond of indirect expression (paroksa-priyo).
Canto 4 Overview
4 . 2 9 TALKS BETWEEN NÁRADA AND KING PRÁCÍNABARHI
1-25: Narada's               O n the request of Prácínabarhi,
elaboration on the             Nárada explained all the different
allegorical story                       characters
26-29: The jíva gets different hodies
according to the modes
26-33: Nárada's direct \^
description of matériái C      -.r,    -r\. - •       i • ii       i i
existence        '•• \ ^ 30-33: The jiva is wandering like a dogi
^      and cannot escape sarhsara by
matériái means
34-41: Narada gives           No remedy by matériái means. The
bhakti as a solution          only remedy is to surrender to Krsna
42-45: Jnanís and karmis do not know
the Lord
4.29 Talks
Between                                                  46-48: Futility of ritualistic
42-55: Nárada ends
performances
Nárada and                 PrácTnaharhi's
King               performance of rituals
49-51: Pleasing the Lord is the
Prácínabarhi                                                    supreme activity
52-55: Deer allegory
56-59: Further            How can the results of karma come in
questions by               the next life when the body that
Prácínabarhi               performed them got destroyed?
Explained by - subtie body; example
60-79: Transmigration
of dream; the mind as index of past
of the soul
and future lives.
80-82: Renunciation of         He immediately renounces and finally |
King Prácínaharhi                     attains the Lord
Liberation; dear understanding of the !
83-85: Phala-s'ruti
soul's transmigration        |
&^éí '^^éí''&'éí '&'ÍÍ '^2^ií ' * 3 ^-                    4.29 Talks Between Nárada and King Prácínabarhi
1 -25: NÁRADA'S ELABORATION O N THE ALLEGORY O F PURANJANA                         |
1 . Pracinabarhi said, " W e couldn't completely understand the purport of your words
due to our attachment to karma. But experts in spiritual knowledge can understand
them."
2-24: Nárada explains the different characters in the allegory
Character              Compared to                            Comments
Puranjana              Living entity {jíva)     Transmigrating according to one's
work into different bodies -
City                   Body                     with one, two, three, many or no legs.
Avijnáta               Supreme Lord             Since the jivas cannot realize the Lord
(eternal friend of the   by matériái names, activities or
jiva)                    qualities, He remains unknown.
4   Nine gates of the      Body with nine           When the jiva wants to enjoy, he
city                   openings and two         considers a humán or demigod body
hands                    to be the best.
5   Puranjani              Matériái intelligence    Produces the concepts of " 1 " and
(ignorance)              "mine," taking shelter of which, the
jiva enjoys the gunas with his senses,
entrapped in the body.
6   Male friends           Ten senses               Instruments for enjoying the matériái
world.
Female friends^        Actions of the senses    Tasting, hearing, smelling, etc.
Serpent with five      Life air with five       Prdna, apdna, uddna, vydna and
heads                  different functions      samdna.
Eleventh attendant     Mind, the leader of      Both in the acquisition of knowledge
(commander of the      the ten senses           and in the performance of work.
others)
The Pancala states     Five sense objects       Within this kingdom is the body (city)
8-16. Description of the nine gates: Please refer to section 4.25.45-55.
17. T h e intelligence (the queen) creates different situations for the jiva, both in his
wakeful state and dreaming state. Under its influence, the jíva simply imitates its
actions and reactions.
Note: This verse explains the description starting in 4.25.56-62.
In 4.25.20 the female friends are compared to the unlimited desires of the senses.
Canto 4 Overview
18-20. Chariot-body analogy: Please refer to the table in section 4.26.1-3
21-24. Candavega's attack on the city: Please refer to the tables in sections
4.27.13-14,19-30.
25. T h e jiva's falsé ego: Although transcendental to this matériái existence, the jiva,
out of ignorance, accepts matériái miseries under the concept of " 1 " and "mine."
Thus he lives for a hundred years within this body.
2 6 - 3 3 : NÁRADA'S DiRECT DESCRIPTION O F MATERIAL EXISTENCE
26-31: Wanderings of the jiva
26-27. Misuse of independence under the modes: The jtva forgets the Lord
comes under the influence of the modes              identifies with the body —> performs
actions in sattva, rajas or tamás —>• gets different types of bodies as per the modes.
28. Destinations according to the influence of the modes
Mode        Actions                                           Destination   ÍWiBHIH
Goodness    Pious actions as per Vedic injunctions            Heavens where the
)                                                                 demigods reside
Planetary systems where
Passión     Laborious activities
humán beings live
Ignorance   Actions that lead to misery and lamentation       Animál kingdom
29. Different bodies: The jíva gets different types of bodies under the influence of
the modes while wandering in sarhsara - male, female, eunuch, humán being,
demigod, animál, etc.
Note: Why Puranjana became a woman is answered here.
30-31. Wandering like a dog: A hungry wretched dog, wandering from house to
house, sometimes receives punishment and sometimes gets food. Similarly, the jiva,
full of desires, by fate, attains enjoyable or disagreeable bodies in the higher, middle
or lower planets.
ksut-parito yathd dirtah sdrameyo grharh grham
carart vindati yad-distam dandam odanam eva vd
tathd kdmdsayo jtva uccdvaca-pathd bhramatt
upary adho vd madhye vd ydti distath priydpriyam
32-33: No escape by material means
32. Futile attempts: All the attempts of the jiva to counteract the three-fold miseries
remain futile.
§ 3 ^ í ' Ö ^ I Í ' S Í H Í Í ' ' S t 4 Í í ' Í A * l ( i ' 'IA   4.29 Talks Between Narada and King Pracinabarhi
33. T r a n s f e r r i n g burden: Such attempts to escape miseries are like shifting a burden
from his bead to his shoulder.
yathd hi puruso bhdrarh sirasd gurum udvahan
tam skandhena sa ddhatte tathd sarvdh pratikriydh
Link: The cause of suffering is sinful activity. So one may suggest that doing a great
sacrifice would atone for such sinful actions.
3 4 - 4 1 : NÁRADA'S SOLUTION FOR THE SOUL'S PREDICAMENT - BHAKTI
34-35. Awakening to K r s n a consciousness: One cannot counteract a troublesome
dream by another hallucination, but only by waking up. Similarly, material
existence which is due to our ignorance cannot be counteracted by karma, but only
by awakening to Krsria consciousness.
L i n k : How can one stop samsdra?
3 6 - 4 1 : The only remedy is to surrender to Krsna
36-37. B h a k t i through guru: One's real interest (artha-bhütasya) is to get out of
nescience (sarhsrtih). The remedy is bhakti unto the Lord through His representative
(bhaktyd paramayd gurau). Without this one can develop neither detachment nor real
knowledge.
athdtmano 'rtha-bhütasya yato 'nartha-parampard
samsrtis tad-vyavacchedo bhaktyd paramayd gurau
38. Hearing leads to seeing the L o r d : One who faithfully hears and studies the
Lord's glories, and is always engaged in the culture of Krsna consciousness, very soon
becomes eligible to see the Lord.
so 'cirdd eva rdjarse        sydd acyuta-kathdsrayah
srnvatah sraddadhdnasya nityadd sydd adhiyatah
l ink: Where will bhakti take place?
39. Krsna-kathá ís found where -
I      yatra bhdgavatd rdjan                   broad-minded and pure devotees live,
sddhavo visaddsaydh
bhagavad-gundnukathana-                   who hear and chant the glories of the
sravana-vyagra-cetasah                  Supreme Lord with great eagerness. ^
Canto TüveifsMv
40. One who hears krsna-katha t h e r ^ ^ ^ ^ ' ' ' ' ' * * ' ' ' ^ ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ^ ^
tasmm mahan-mukharitá madhubhtc-cantra- "^^^'^          ^""'^^^ nectarean narrations
. ,       ,            constantly flow from the mouths of
piyusa-sesa-sarttan paritan sravantt           ,
•               •            pure devotees -
td ye pibanty avitrso nrpa gddha-karnais  ^"^^            ^^em through eager and
attentive ears - will not feel hunger,
tan na sprsanty asana-trd-bnaya-soka-mohah , •     r     ,              j n •
••    ^             thirst, rear, lamentation and iilusion.
41. Disturbances: The condition soul is always disturbed by bodily necessities and
has very little time to cultivate attachment for hearing the kathdmrta of the Lord.
Note: Without the association of devotees, one cannot cultivate Krsna consciousness.
Nirjana-bhajana - cultivating Krsna consciousness in a solitary place - is not possihle
for a neophyte devotee, for he will be disturbed by the bodily necessities such as
eating, sleeping, mating and defending.
42-51: NÁRADA ENDS PRÁCÍNABARHI'S PERFORMANCE O F RITUALS
42-44. Rarity of knowing the L o r d : Brahma, Siva, the Kumaras, many others, and
even myself (Nárada) are - (i) knowledgeable in the Vedas (brahma-vddinah), (ii)
skilful at speaking them (vdcaspatih), (iii) powerful by austerities, education and
meditation (tapo-vidyd-samddhibhih). But even we do not know or see the Lord
perfectly (na pasyanti), after inquiring about H i m (pasyanto 'pi).
Note: "Jnánis do not know the Lord." This is expressed by kaimutya-nyáya - " I f
we do not know the Lord, then what to speak of others?"
45. K a r m i s do not know the L o r d : Despite cultivating Vedic knowledge and
worshipping the demigods, they cannot understand the Lord (na viduh páram).
L i n k : "If jhdnis and karmis do not know the Lord, who does?"
46. A devotee knows the Lord by engaging in devotional service (dtma-bhdvitah).
When the Lord shows mercy (anugrhndti) to him, he gives up all material activities
and karma-kándic activities.
47. Vedic rituals are never the goal of life (md artha-drstirh), although they may
appear to be legitimate goals (artha-kdsisu) and pleasing to the ear (srotra-sparsisu).
L i n k : "Then why do my priests and the sages, learned men, make me do karmas?"
48. Foolish people do not k n o w this: They (dhümra-dhiyah) accept the Vedic
ritualistic ceremonies as all in all, not knowing that the purpose of the Vedas is to
understand one's own home (svarh lokarh), where the Lord lives.
Talks Between Nárada and King Prácínabarhi
Note: Dhümra-dhiyah indicates that they know Svarga, hut not Vaikuntha.
L i n k : "Then what is the supreme activity? Please teli me."
49. Pleasing the L o r d : Because of your foolishness, you proudly [stabdhah) sacrificed
many animals without knowing the supreme activity, which is to please the Supreme
Lord {hari-tosam).
50. Nature of L o r d H a r i : T o make one's life auspicious, everyone should take shelter
at the lotus feet of the Lord, who is -
(i) deha-bhrtám átmá - the Supersoul of all embodied entities
(ii) prakrtir isvarah - the Supreme controller or Mother and Father of all
(iii) saranarh - Shelter of all
51. Result of worshipping the Lord " ' ^ ' ' ' l ' ' ' ' ^ ^
sa vai priyatamas cátmá             Because the Lord is the Supersoul and friend of everyone, |
one who is engaged in devotional service has not the least
yato na bhayam anv api
fear in material existence.
iti veda sa vai vidván            One who knows this secret is actually educated and
yo vidván sa gurur harih            can hecome guru of the world, nondifferent to Krsna.
L i n k : Pracinabarhi considered in his mind to send his servants to bring his sons, the
Pracetas, to hand over the kingdom to them, and depart for the forest. Understanding
this, Nárada Muni then told another story about a deer to make him immediately
leave the house.
52-55: ALLEGORY O F A DEER
52.1 answered all your queries. N o w hear another story which is very confidential.
53. Deer A l l e g o r y l I M H H P IP 54. Meaning                 ÍMBBBPWBBBHPBUBPIP
A deer is grazing on grass and                   A man is absorbed in househoid life in the
enjoying with his mate in a garden               company of his wife and thinking of sex life.
of flowers that are aromatic.
His ears are attracted to the songs of           He enjoys the talks of his wife and children.
swarms of bumble bees.
He moves about without considering               Enjoying in househoid life, he forgets that
the hungry tiger in front of him.                time is hefore him, taking away his life-span.
A hunter is behind him ready to                  The superintendent of death is trying to kill
shoot him with arrows.                           him from behind.
Canto 4 Overview       f » jíí*2í'II"«§"í^^^
55. Y o u are like the deer, desiring heavenly planets by fruitive activity. Give up your
abominable (asat-tama) househoid life (angand-dsramam) filled with stories of man
and woman [yütha-gdtham) and take shelter of the Lord through the mercy of
liberated souls (hamsa-saranam).
56. " M y teachers bewildered me: I have heard and considered what you have
spoken. It seems my teachers do not know these facts. (So, I accept you as my guru.)
57. Y o u have destroyed my doubts created by these teachers. N o w I can see how
even great sages with controUed senses can be bewildered (rsayo 'pi hi muhyanti).
L i n k : / have one more doubt concerning the path of karma. Please destroy that too.
58. Transfer of karma to next life: The results of whatever a living entity does in
this life are enjoyed in the next life.
59. But what is the proof of this? Practically it is seen that the body that performed
the work in the last birth is already lost. So how is it possihle to enjoy or suffer the
reactions of that work in a different body?
60-79: NÁRADA EXPLAINS THE MIND'S ROLE IN THE SOUL'S TRANSMIGRATION
60. T h e subtle body remains after death: The gross body is forced to act through
the subtle body of which the mind is predominant [lingena manasd). After the gross
body is lost, the subtle body is still there to enjoy or suffer.
L i n k : This is explained with the help of the example of a dream.
61. Logic of a dream to understand reincarnation:
Dream                                  Reincarnation
While dreaming, one gives up          A t death one gives up his gross body.
the gross body.
Through the subtle body, one          With the subtle body one enters another
acts in another body, either as a     gross body and experiences the results of
god or a dog.                         the actions of one's past life.
SthmMMíjmMm                                  4.29 Talks Between Narada and King Pracinabarhi
62. Reason for one's next life:
He receives the                 By that action, performed
Identifying with his
results of that                with a certain identity, he
gross body, a jíva
action in his subtle               takes birth in another
performs action
body                             gross body.
63. Understanding one's previous life:
Reveal one's citta
One's actions through                                                  Reveal one's position
(consciousness or
the ten senses                                                       in the previous life.
mentái condition)
L i n k : "How can we perceive the subtle body which is not destroyed when the gross
body is destroyed?"
64. Unseen objects i n dreams: One gets dreams in which unseen, unheard events are
experienced.
65. Mentái impressions from the previous body: It is not possible for anything to
appear in the mind which has not been previously experienced in different bodies
{deha-sambhavam).
66. T h e mind indicates one's past and future bodies: The mentái composition
indicates one's attainment of bodies in accordance with matériái nature.
L i n k : "How is it that one sometimes sees impossible things in dreams, such as an
ocean on a mountain top, stars during the day, or one's own body without a head?"
67. Dreams are combination of images: The impossible things in dreams, that are
nevet experienced or heard of in this life, have actually been experienced in different
times, places and conditions. Under illusion one combines these separate factors.
Note: For example, a golden mountain seen in dream is due to our having
experienced gold and mountains separately.
68. T h e mind is the storehouse of thoughts, experiences and desires, which appear
in a particular sequence (krama-anurodhena) and in different combinations.
Therefore these images sometimes appear as things nevet seen or nevet heard before.
69. A devotee avoids transmigration: A devotee absorbed in Krsna consciousness
(sattvaika-nisthe) can observe the cosmic manifestation exactly as the Lord does, just
like seeing Ráhu in the presence of the full moon.
Note: By the grace of Lord Krsna, Mother Yasodá saw all the universes within
Krsna's mouth. Similarly, by the Lord's grace, a Krsna conscious person can see all his
dormant desires at one time and these desires will no longer fructify into gross bodies.
'MmMMMMMmMmimmM^jmmMm
^ ^ ^ H H V                              ' xT?faíl!l?2f-^'£l32í:?*"''^''*- '
70. Falsé Identification is due to the subtle body: One's falsé Identification [mameti
bháva) and the gross body exist as long as the subtle body (mind, intelligence, senses,
sense objects, matériái reactions) exists.
L i n k : "The gross bodies are created and destroyed thousands of times while the subtle
body remains. Similarly while the gross body remains there is destruction of the subtle
body during deep sleep." - Why can't we say this?
71-73: The subtle body is not destroyed wben tbe senses are inactive
71. When does one lose self-awareness? - (i) supti: deep sleep, (ii) mürccha: fainting,
(iii) upatapesu: grief, (iv) mrtyu: death, (v) prajvarayoh: high temperature (fever).
Note: In all the above states, the senses are inactive (to different degrees), and thus
one does not identify the self with the body. However, the subtle body doesn't cease
to exist.
72. Undeveloped senses: A l l the ten senses and the mind are active in youth, but in
the womb of the mother or in childhood, they remain covered just as the full moon is
not visible on the dark-moon night.
Note: Unless the senses of the gross body are developed, they will not act on the
subtle body. Similarly, because of the absence of desires in the subtle body, there may
be no development in the gross body.
73. Inactive senses do not indicate a liberated state: One enjoys objects in a dream,
though the objects are not present. Similarly, sarhsára does not cease for a person
who is attached to sense objects but not in contact with them, like during childhood
(undeveloped senses) and deep sleep (inactive senses).
L i n k : What is the subtle body?
74. Definition of the subtle body: The form which consists of the five pránas and
the three gunas, which is furnished with the sixteen transformations (ten senses, five
sense objects, and mind), and which is endowed with consciousness is called the
subtle body.
75. Transmigration of soul: By the subtle body the jiva accepts gross bodies and
gives them up, and experiences joy, lamentation, fear, grief and happiness.
L i n k : An analogy to explain transmigration of soul.
76-77. A caterpillar does not give up one leaf before transferring itself to the next.
Similarly, the jiva does not give up his previous identity, even while dying, or until he
has accepted another body by firmly holding on to his karmas. Thus the mind (the
reservoir of all desires) is the cause of repeated birth (bhütdndm bhava-bhávanam).
L^íí    'ÖMÍÍ'"Ölfí     ^^At^íí'&'íí                  'tS     4.29 Talks Between Narada and King Pracinabarhi
L i n k : How is the mind the cause of samsára?
Matériái
Desires for
activities
Sense
under
enjoyment
ignorance
78. T h e cause of samsára: Thinking of sense gratification (aksais caritdn),              one
performs matériái activities under ignorance              (avidyd) and is entrapped in the
bondage (bandhah) of karma.
79.   Therefore     worship the     Lord      (bhaja sarvdtmand harim) to            counteract
ignorance. He is the creator, maintainer, destroyer and controUer of the universe.
80-82: RENUNCIATÍON O F K I N G PRÁCÍNABARHISAT
80. Thus Narada Muni enlightened Pracinabarhisat and returned to Siddhaloka.
81. Prácinaharhi retired: He left orders with his ministers, that his sons (the
Pracetás) protect the citizens. Then he left home for Kapilásrama.
Note: When Pracinabarhi was induced by Narada to leave home and take to
devotional service, the Pracetás had not yet returned from their austerities.
82. Prácínaharhi's perfection: Being free of matériái association (vimukta-sango)
and constantly engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord, King
Pracinabarhi attained a spiritual position qualitatively equal (sdmyatdm) to that of
the Lord.
83-85: PHALA-S'RUTI
83     sa lingena vimucyate              Liherates one from the subtle body
84     bhuvanarh pundnarh                Sanctifies the matériái world
dtma-saucam                       Purifies the jiva's heart
mukta-samasta-bandhah             Liherates him from all bondage
adhigacchati pdramesthyarh        Elevates him to the spiritual world
85     striydsramah puthsas chinno       Relieves him from the bodily conception
chinno amutra ca sarhsayah        Clears his doubts about the next life
i3
Canto 4 Overview
4 . 3 0 T H E ACTIVITIES O F THE PRACETÁS
• 7 « '
1-2: Vidura's questions to Maitreya: What did
they achieve by chanting Rúdra Glta
1-7: Pracetas attain
Visnu-darsana
\ | 3 - 7 : Pracetas chant Rúdra Glta and attain Visnu-j
darsana                     I
8:1 ann pleased by your friendly relationships
9-10: Result of remembering you and chanting
8-21: The Lord's                               Rudra-gita                 I
speech to the                  11-18: Benedictions - fame, famous son,          |
Pracetás                   suitable wife, full bodily strength, long life,   |
1                 unadulterated bhakti                  i
19-20: Qualities of devotees
22-26: Qualities of the Lord
4.30 The                                       27-28: The Lord's form and Arca-vigraha
22-32: Pracetás I / y [
Activities      offer obeisances in
of the       prayer to the Lord >   [.       29-30: Your satisfaction is our benediction
I Pracetás                               \i 31-32: Seeking benediction from the Unlimited
I                    Lord
33-34: Hearing in association; Importance of
association
35-36: Effects of hearing krsna-katha
33-42: Pracetás
request                    37-38: Purifying potency of the devotees
%1
benedictions
39-40: Offering of all spiritual assets
41-42: Prayers as per capacity and the Lord's
qualities
43-51: Pracetás ]        143-46: The Lord departs. Pracetas emerge from
marry Márísa; Birth       ': water and burn the trees. Brahmá pacifies them;
and activities of       j 47-51: Pracetas married Márisa, Daksa's expert;
Paksa        J                        procreation                  j
mímmmmímimmmímmhmM                                                                                      V*4
4.30 The Activities of the Pracetás
L i n k : In 4.24 Maitreya started narrating the activities of the Pracetas (sons of Pracinabarhi),
who learned how to satisfy the Supreme Lord by chanting the Rudra-gita. Now Vidura wants
to hear the rest of the story and their achievements in satisfying the Lord.
1 - 2 : VIDURA'S QUESTIONS T O MAITREYA A B O U T THE PRACETÁS
1 . What did the Pracetás achieve by satisfying the Supreme Lord with the Rudra-gita}
2. Certainly they were transferred to the spiritual world, but what did they obtain
within this matériái world?
3-7: T H E PRACETÁS C H A N T THE RUDRA-GITA AND ATTAIN VISNU-DARSANA
3. T h e Pracetás satisfied V i s n u : They underwent austerities in the ocean and
satisfied Visnu (puranjanam) by chanting the Rudra-gita.
Note: Both the Lord and the living entity are called puranjana.
(i) A living entity is called puranjana because he is forced to live in the matéria! world
under the influence of the three modes.
(ii) The Lord is called puranjana because He creates this matériái world [púra), and He
also enters within the hearts of the living entities and within every atom.
4. T h e eternal Supreme L o r d appeared in front of the Pracetás after 10,000 years,
and mitigated their austerities by H i s soothing beauty.
5-7. T h e Lord's beauty: He appeared in an eight-armed with weapons in each hand.
His transcendental body was covered by yellow garments, the Kaustubha-mani, a
garland, and H i s effulgence dissipated the darkness of the universe. He wore a
dazzling beimet and was surrounded by sages and demigods. Garuda, H i s carrier,
glorified H i m with Vedic hymns by flapping his wings. With a merciful glancé, the
Lord mercifully addressed the surrendered Pracetás.
8 - 2 1 : T H E LORD'S SPEECH T G THE PRACETÁS
8 . 1 am pleased by Y o u r friendly relationships...
vararh vrnidhvarh bhadrarh My dear sons of the king, I wish you all good fortune.
vo yüyarh me nrpa-nandanáh Now you may ask a benediction from Me.
Ali of you are engaged in one occupation - devotional
sauhárdenaprthag-dharmas
service.
tusto 'harh sauhrdena vah     I am very pleased by your friendly relationships.
iiMmimMM'M.mi
mmMmimMMmmim.
Canto 4 Overx iou
mM          ,7M3. i ; T(wr
Note: The unity of the individuai souls attempting to satisfy the Supreme Lord or
tendering service to the Lord is reál unity.
9. Those who remember you every evening will develop close friendships with their
brothers and all living entities.
10. Those who glorify Me w i t h the Rudra-gita will receive M y benediction to fulfil
their desires and attain good intelligence.
11. Submissiveness: "Because you have (/') accepted with pleasure {agrahista
muddnvitáh) and {ii) executed with faith, the orders of your father, your attractive
qualities will be celebrated all over the world.
12. Y o u w i l l have a famous son whose progeny will fül the three worlds.
13-14. Marisa: A n Apsará called Pramlocá previously united with Kandu and gave
birth to a daughter (named Marisa) whom she left in the care of the trees. When the
child cried, Candra poured nectar in her mouth with his fingét.
15. M a r r y her and create progeny.
16. Same nature: Y o u (being devotees, obedient to your father) and the girl
(dedicated to you) are of one, compatible nature. Therefore she should be the wife of
all of you.
Note: A woman cannot have many hushands, although a man can have many wives.
However, in special cases, a girl is allowed to, provided she is able to treat ali her
hushands equally (e.g. Draupadi). With the hlessings of the Lord, all things are
possihle.
17. Enjoy all facilities of this world and heaven with full bodily strength and without
hindrance for one millión celestial years.
18. Y o u will develop unadulterated bhakti unto Me. Freed of all matériái
contamination and attachment, you will go back to Godhead.
L i n k : The Lord told the Pracetds to enjoy earthly pleasures, which are equivalent to
hell and unfavourable for bhakti. Why did He force it on them?
19. Devotees are not entangled: They understand Me as the ultimate enjoyer, offer
their results to Me, and discuss topics about Me. Thus they are unaffected by the
results of actions, although in family life.
grhesv dvisatdth cdpi
pumsdrh kusala-karmandm
mad-vdrtd-ydta-ydmdndhi
na bandhdya grhd matdh
4.30 The Activities of the Pracetás
20. Qualities of devotees engaged i n bhakti:
(i)    navyavad dhrdaye - ever-increasingly fresh and new in all their activities
(ii)    na muhyanti - nevet bewildered
(iii)    na socantina - never lamenting
(iv)     na hrsyanti - not unnecessarily jubilant
21. T h e Pracetás begin their prayers: After the Lord had spoken, the Pracetás began
offering prayers with faltering voices {girdgrnan gadgadayd) in ecstasy {suhrttamam).
22. Four qualities of the Lord
namo namah klesa-vindsandya           Relieves matériái distress
nirüpitoddra-gundhvaydya            Has all-auspicious qualities and holy name
mano-vaco-vega-puro-javdya            Is faster than the mind and words
sarvdksa-márgair agatddhvane namah            Cannot be perceived by matériái senses
23. The Lord's interaction with the matériái world
You are pure, peaceful and fixed in Your
suddhdya sdntaya namah sva-nisthayd
svarüpa. You make the matériái world of
manasy apdrtham vilasad-dvaydya
duality appear meaningless.
Your appearances as Brahmá, Visnu and Siva
namo jagat-sthdna-layodayesu
are meant for the creation, maintenance and
grhita-mdyd-guna-vigrahdya
annihilation of this cosmic manifestation.
24. Further qualities of the L o r d :
(i)    visuddha-sattvdya - Exists completely independent of all matériái influences
(ii)    haraye - Takes away the devotee's misery
(iii)    hari-medhase - Whose brain works only to deliver the conditioned souls
(iv)     vdsudevdya - Lives everywhere as Paramátmá
(v) prabhave sarva-sdtvatdm - Increases the influence of all kinds of devotees.
25. The Lord is the origin of everything
From Your abdomen sprouts the lotus flower,
namah kamala-ndbhaya
the origin of all living entities.
namah kamala-mdline         You are always decorated with a lotus garland.
namah kamala-pdddya         Your feet are as beautiful and fragrant as a lotus.
namas te kamaleksana        Your eyes are like lotus petals.
m£mmimmmmjmM:mmmmmí
Canto 4 Overview
Bmmxmmhmimm
26. AU-pervasive and Supreme witness: Your non-material garments are yellow like
the saffron dust of a lotus (namah kamala-kinjalka-pisangdmala-vdsase) and Y o u are
the all-pervasive (sarva-bhüta-nivdsdya) supreme witness (sdksine).
27. The Lord's mercy in manifesting His form
...        _       ,     T o deliver conditioned souls from their miserable
rüpam bhagavatd tv etad
conditions, Y o u mercifully advented in this form.
asesa-klesa-sanksayam
What then can he said about Your mercy upon the
dviskrtarh nah klistdndrh
devotees, to whom Y o u are always so favourably
kim anyád anukampitam
disposed?
28. Arcá-vigraha: Y o u are the killer of all inauspicious things (abhadra-randhana).
Being compassionate on Your poor devotees (dinesu vatsalaih) Y o u appear as the
arcd-vigraha.
29. A s Supersoul, Y o u know the desires of every living entity and fulfil all of them.
L i n k : "You should say in words what you want."
30. Y o u r satisfaction is our benediction: We are satisfied that Your Lordship is the
ultimate goal of our lives. We do not desire anything other than Your satisfaction.
asav eva varo 'smakam ipsito jagatah pate
prasanno bhagavdn yesdm apavarga-gurur gatih
L i n k : The Lord asked the Pracetas to pray for somé benediction.
31. Ananta: We shall therefore pray for another benediction because Y o u are the
unlimited Supreme, heyond all transcendence, with endless opulences.
varam vrnimahe 'thapi nátha tvat paratah párat
na hy antas tvad-vibhütindm so 'nanta iti giyase
Note: Unlimited benediction - Because the Lord is unlimited (ananta), the Pracetás
wanted to ask Him a benediction that had no limit, namely the hearing of His
unlimited pastimes, qualities, forms and names.
L i n k : "So then, ask for many boons, as much as you want." No. We want only Your
lotus feet. In order to attain a taste of that sweetness, there is one boon we desire.
32. What further benediction may we ask of You? We have already taken shelter of
Your lotus feet. A bee that has approached a pdrijdta tree does not have to leave it.
parijate 'njasa labdhe sarango 'nyan na sevate
tvad-anghri-mülam dsddya sdksdt kim kim vrnimahi
m'i^mímíimmxáwmmxmx^m
1                 M'Mj^mi                        4.30 The Activities of the Pracetas
33-42: T H E PRACETÁS REQUEST BENEDICTIONS
33. Hearing i n association life after life: As long as we wander in this world
because of our actions, contaminated by maya, we want the association of devotees
who discuss Your pastimes, life after life.
yávat te máyayá sprstá bhramáma iha karmabhih
tavad bhavat-prasangdndth sangah syán no bhave bhave
L i n k : The Lord might have said, "You said you were contaminated by maya, and to
conquer maya, you pray for devotee association. Then, why don't you just directly ask
for liberation?"
34. Pure devotee association is the highest: Even a moment's association of a pure
devotee cannot be compared to being transferred to heavenly planets or even merging
into the Brahman effulgence in complete liberation.
tulayáma lavenápi na svargam ndpunar-bhavam
bhagavat-sangi-sangasya martydndm kim utdsisah
35-36. Four effects of hearing krsna-katha -
(i)   trsndydh prasamo - no hankering
(ii)   nirvairam - no envy
(iii)   nodvego - no fear
(iv)    yatra ndrdyanah sdksdd - Narayana is personally present
37. Y o u r devotees wander and purify even holy places. Thus they please those who
are afraid of matériái existence.
tesdm vicaratdrh padbhydm tirthdndrh pdvanecchayd
bhitasya kim na roceta tdvakdndm samdgamah
38. " B y a moment's association of L o r d Siva we attained Y o u , the expert physician
[bhisak-tamam) capable of treating the incurable disease of matériái existence."
L i n k : Being ignorant, we do not know the process of pleasing You. You should be
pleased with what we have done randomly.
39-40. A l l our spiritual assets (Vedic studies, non-enviousness, austerities, etc.) are
offered for Your satisfaction.
41. Prayers as per capacity: Even great yogis and mystics cannot fully understand
Your glories, yet they offer prayers according to their capacities. So do we.
Canto 4 Overview          ÍÍ^ÍÍ^ÍÍ^S*''ft^S^^
42. Conclusion: Lord's various qualities -
(i)   samáya - equal to everyone
(ü)    suddhdya - never contaminated
(iii)   purusdya - the Supreme Person
(iv)    pardya - transcendental
(v)    vdsudevdya - living everywhere
(vi)    sattvdya - in a transcendental position
4 3 - 4 6 : T H E LORD DEPARTS AND THE PRACETÁS RETURN T O LAND
43. T h e Lord's renunciation: The Lord, who is affectionate to the surrendered
(saranya-vatsalah) and has vigorous strength (apavarga-viryah), fulfilled the Pracetás'
prayers. They could not satisfy their eyes [atrpta-caksusdm] by looking at H i m and
although they didn't want H i m to. He departed. This showed His detachment.
44-45. T h e Pracetás' anger: They emerged from the sea and saw that tall trees had
overgrown the entire earth and were even obstructing the heavens. Wanting to clear
the earth (for agriculture) they became angry and emitted fire from their mouths.
46. Brahmá saw the burning trees and came to pacify the Pracetás using logic.
4 7 - 5 1 : BIRTH AND ACTIVITIES O F DAKSA
47-48: T h e Pracetás married Márisá, who was given to them by the trees, under the
advice of Brahmá. From her Daksa took birth, due to his offence to Lord Siva.
49. Daksa created all the living entities for the Cáksusa manvantara.
50-51. Daksa's expertise: Being "expert" in fruitive activity, Brahmá engaged Daksa
in generating and maintaining the living entities. Later on, Daksa engaged other
Prajápatis as well.
4.31 Narada Instructs the Pracetas
4 . 3 1 NÁRADA INSTRUCTS THE PRACETÁS
1-8: Pracetás ^                   1-2: Pracetas rétire
renounce the
kingdom and        3-8: Narada arrives and the Pracetas request him
meet Narada          to enlighten them and Narada began to reply
9: One achieves perfection by bhakti
9-14:
Devotional         10-12: All other processes are useless without
service is the ^                        bhakti
goal of all
spiritual         13: The Lord is the source of self-realization
practices
14: Worship of the Supreme Lord is complete
The Lord is the source of everything
4.31           15-17: The
Narada     • Supreme Lord       16: The Lord and the cosmos are simultaneously
is worthy of all                  one and different
Instructs
í     worship
the                           17: The modes appear and disappear in the Lord
Pracetás
18: The Lord's qualities
i 18-22: Satisfy
the all-        19: Favourable qualities for worshipping the Lord
powerful Lord
by bhakti         20-22: The Lord's dealings with devotees and
nondevotees
23-24: Narada returns and Pracetas attain the
Lord's abode
25: Maitreya concludes
23-31:           26-27: Sukadeva Gosvami says he will narrate
Conclusion                about Priyavrata's descendents
28-30: Vidura thanks Maitreya and returns to
Hastinápura
3 1 : Phala-sruti
Canto 4 Overview
L i n k : The Lord told the Pracetds in 4.30.18 that they would become disgusted with
their kingdom and attain Him. That prediction comes true in this chapter. The
Pracetds detach from their kingdom, leave for the forest and by bhakti described by
Ndrada Muni, attain Krsna.
1-8: T H E PRACETÁS RENOUNCE THEIR K I N G D O M AND MEET N Á R ^ ^
1. T h e Pracetás rétire: After living at home for thousands of years, they finally
remembered the Lord's hlessings and left home, leaving Márisá in the care of Daksa.
2. T h e Pracetás went to the seashore where the sage Jájali was residing. After
perfecting their spiritual knowledge of equanimity toward all living entities, the
Pracetás became perfect in Krsna consciousness.
3. Nárada's arrival: While the Pracetás were practising prdndydma, etc, Nárada,
who is worshipped both by the demons and demigods (surdsuredya), came to see
them.
4. T h e Pracetás inquire: They offered Nárada a seat and inquired from him:
5. " Y o u are like the sun: It is our good fortune to see you. Your movements are like
that of the sun, which drives away all fear (removes the darkness of night).
6. Family attachment: Because of our attachment to family affairs, we almost forgót
the instructions of Siva and Visnu.
7. K i n d l y enlighten us in transcendental knowledge which acts as a torchlight to
cross the dark nescience of matériái existence."
8. Nárada began to reply: The supreme devotee Nárada, who is always absorbed in
thoughts of the Lord (bhagavaty uttama-sloka dvistdtmdbravin), began to reply as
follows:
9 - 1 4 : DEVOTIONAL SERVICE IS THE G O A L O F A L L SPIRITUAL PRACTICES
, • •• ,,..,..i.niiÉ..,...,..n.-.,»i... I, n ,   ^..^mmm^mmmmMmmmmm^^   ,.   •
9. Perfection hy the Lord's service: The birth, activities, life-span, mind and words
of humans are perfected by devotional service unto Fiim.
taj janma tdni karmdni
tad dyus tan mano vacah
nrndrh yena hi visvdtmd
sevyate harir isvarah
4.31 Narada Instructs the Pracetas
10-11. Without hhakti, the following are useless
The three births of a civilized humán being -
kim janmabhis tribhir veha       (i) saukra - birth by semen
saukra-sávitra-yájnikaih      (") sávitra - sacred thread, initiation by guru
10                                   (iii) yajnika - initiation into the performance of
Vedic sacrifices.
karmabhir vá trayi-proktaih The activities instructed in the Vedas
purhso 'pi vibudháyusá     The long life of a humán
srutena tapasá vá kirh     Vedic education and austerity
vacobhis citta-vrttibhih    Power of speech and mentái speculation
buddhyá vá kirh nipunayá     Elevated intelligence and expertise
balenendriya-rádhasá      Bodily strength and sensual power
12. Without God realization, the following are useless
kirh vá yogena sáhkhyena       Mystic yoga and analytical study of matter
nyása-svádhyáyayor api         The renounced order and Vedic study
I        kirh vá sreyobhir anyaié ca     Other auspicious acts
na yatrátma-prado harih       that do not help in realizing Lord Hari are useless.
L i n k : What is the logic in saying that all processes are useless without bhakti?
13. The Lord is the source of self reaíization
sreyasdm api sarvesdm         Of all the auspicious activities,
dtmd hy avadhir arthatah       the jivdtmd is the factual goal or destination.
sarvesdm api bhütdndrh        But the Supreme Lord Hari is the dtmd of all
harir dtmdtmadah priyah        jivdtmds and when He is pleased. He gives Himself.
14. Worship of the Supreme Lord is complete
(        yathd taror müla-nisecanena     Watering the root of a tree energizes the
trpyanti tat-skandha-bhujopasdkhdh trunk, branches, twigs and everything else.
Note: Watering the root is better. But couldn't one water tbe brancbes and leaves also?
Anotber analogy is given to refute tbis argument.
'r~
i     _      , . _                           Supplying food to the stomach enlivens the
I pranopanarac ca yatnendriyanam                       , ,. ,
í      '                           •         senses and iimbs.
Note: Food has to be given to the stomach. It cannot be assimilated by senses like tbe ears
and eyes. Therefore tbe logic of worshipping both tbe Lord and tbe demigods is faulty.
, .       _,           . _      Similarly worshipping the Lord by devotional
tatnaiva sarvarnanam acyutejya                  ...    , , . ,
service satisties the demigods.
mmm)MjmM.M}mmmmMmM
Canto 4 Overview
Water is generated from the sun in monsoon
and evaporated by the sun in the summer.
115. Everything is generated from
i and returns to the Lord like -
Living entities (bodies) are generated from
the earth and return to the earth as dust.
L i n k : 4.31.15 explained that the Supreme Lord is the originál cause of everything.
Now it is explained how the Supreme Lord is all-pervasive.
16. Universe and the L o r d : The universe is simultaneously one with and different
from the Lord -
• Sunshine analogy: The sunshine emanates from the sun and is nondifferent
from the sun. Similarly, the universe emanates from the Lord and is not different
from H i m . Therefore, the Lord is all-pervading in the universe, like the sun.
• Senses analogy: The senses appear manifest (as part of the body) in the waking
State and unmanifest during sleep (but are actually always there). Similarly, the
universe sometimes appears manifest and sometimes unmanifest (but the Lord's
energy always exists).
L i n k : How can the Lord who is heyond the gunas of the universe be the cause of the
universe made of gunas?
17. T h e Modes appear and disappear in the L o r d : Clouds, darkness, and light
appear and disappear in the sky in succession. Similarly the euergies of rajas, tamás
and sattva appear and disappear in the Lord.
Note: Though the sun is heyond the clouds, it is their matéria! cause, and remains
unchanged. Similarly, the Lord, though heyond the gunas, is the cause of the universe
and unchanging.
Mm?mmmmmm^Mmm.m^Mm.
4.31 Nárada Instructs the Pracetás
1 8 - 2 2 : SATISFY THE ALL-POWERFUL LORD BY DEVOTIONAL SERVICE
18. The Lord's qualities - Engage in His service
tenaikam átmánam asesa-dehinárh               The Lord is one, the Supersoul of all entities.
He is the remete and immediate cause, the     I
kalarh pradhánath purusam paresam
Supreme Person and transcendental controller. \
He is aloof from matériái interactions by His
sva-tejasa dhvasta-guna-pravaham
spiritual energy.
Therefore engage in His devotional service
átmaika-bhávena bhajadhvam addhá
thinking yourself qualitatively one with Him.
19. Favourable qualities for worshipping the Lord
dayayá sarva-bhütesu             By showing mercy to ali beings,
santustyá yena kena vá being satisfied somehow or other,
sarvendriyopasántyá ca            and controlling the senses from sense enjoyment,
tusyaty ásu janárdanah            one can very quickly satisfy the Lord
Cleansed of all matériái desires (apahata sakala esana)
Freed from mentái contamination (amalatmani)
20.               Devotees
Intimacy                                      Constantly addressing the Lord very feelingly
between                                           (aviratam edhita-bhávanopahütah).
t
the Lord
and His
devotees
\   Supreme ^,y^ •
Controlled by His devotees (nija-jana-vasa)
Lord
Never leaves them (na sarati satárh)
Relishes the                    No matériái possessions (adhana)
activities of
the devotees                 Happy in possessing bhakti (átma-dhana)
21.
The Lord's                                      Püffed up with matériái education, wealth,
I reciprocation          Doesn't                         aristocracy and fruitive activity
accept                       (sruta-dhana-kula-karmanárh madair)
worship of
nondevotees                           Often deride devotees
(vidadhati pápám akincanesu satsu)
y**\
Canto 4 Overview
L i n k : Just as the devotees have possessiveness of the Lord and no one else, the Lord
has possessiveness of the devotees.
22. T h e Lord's affection for devotees: The self-sufficient (sva-pürnah) Lord
becomes dependent on devotees (nija-bhrtya-varga-tantrah) and does not even care
for the goddess of fortune, kings and demigods. Which grateful person (krta-jhah)
will not worship the Lord?
2 3 - 3 1 : MAITREYA C O N C L U D E S AND SUKADEVA G O S V Á M Í OFEERS BENEDICTIONS
23. Nárada then returned to Brahmaloka, having narrated the Lord's topics.
24. T h e Pracetás' attained the Lord's abode: Hearing from Nárada the Lord's
glories that vanquish all ill fortune of the world (yaso loka-malápaham), the Pracetás
also became attached to the Lord. Meditating on H i s lotus feet, they advanced to the
ultimate destination.
25. Maitreya concludes: " T h u s I have narrated the conversation of Nárada and the
Pracetás, describing the Lord's glories [samvádath hari-kirtanam).
2 6 - 3 1 : Sukadeva Gosvámí to Pariksit Maharaja
26. Uttánapáda: I have described the dynasty of Uttanapada,                    the   son   of
Sváyambhuva Manu. N o w hear about the dynasty of Priyavrata.
27. Priyavrata received spiritual knowledge from Nárada, yet he still engaged in
ruling the earth. After enjoying matériái possessions, he divided his property among
his sons, and attained the Lord's abode.
28. Vidura's gratitude: Ecstatic with tears, after hearing from Maitreya, Vidura feli
at his lotus feet and fixed the Lord within the core of his heart.
29. V i d u r a thanks Maitreya: " B y your causeless mercy I have been shown the path
of liberation. Following this path, one can return back to Godhead."
30. Taking his permission, V i d u r a started for Hastinápura, to see his relatives.
Note: A saintly person doesn't visít family out of matériái desire to see them, but to
deliver them. Vidura purpose was to deliver Dhrtarástra from the clutches of maya.
31. Phala-sruti: Those who hear these topics about surrendered kings obtain a long
life, wealth, reputation, good fortune and ultimately, the opportunity to return back
to Godhead.
S3SII3A lVD3dS
special verses           fOíílOllOí^jííl^
SPECIAL VERSES
1 . Spiritual Eniightenment
y o ' n t a h pravisya m a m a . . .   221
2 . Unparalleled Bliss
yá nirvrtis tanu-bhrtárh...            223
3. Endearing to Lord Siva
y a h pararh rarhhasah s á k s á t . . .     225
4. Watering the Root
yathá taror m ü l a . . .    227
©l^r'Ölír^Ajlir'Ö^^^^^                                        ^ • Spíntual Eniightenment
1 . SPIRITUAL ENLIGHTENMENT
yo 'ntah pravisya m a m a vácam imám prasuptáih
sanjivayaty a k h i l a - s a k t i - d h a r a h sva-dhámná
anyáihs ca hasta-carana-sravana-tvag-ádin
pránán namo hhagavate purusáya t u h h y a m
" M y dear Lord, Y o u are all-powerful (akhila-sakti-dharah). After
entering within me (yo antah pravisya), by your spiritual power
(sva-dhámná), Y o u have enlivened (sanjivayaty) all my sleeping
senses (imám prasuptám)—my (mama) hands (hasta), legs (carana),
ears (sravana), touch sensation (tvag), life force (pránán) and
especially my power of speech (vácam). Let me offer my respectful
obeisances unto Y o u (namo bhagavate purusáya tubhyam)." [4.9.6]
Context: The Supreme Lord appeared before Dhruva, having been satisfied by his
devotional austerities. Dhruva, upon seeing H i m , became absorbed in love and
ecstasy. He wanted to offer prayers but was dumhstruck. The Lord however,
understanding Dhruva's heart and his awkward situation, touched His transcendental
conch to his head, empowering him to speak.
All of one's ahilities are due to the hlessings of the Supreme Lord. Even to offer
sincere heartfelt prayers effectively, one has to seek the grace of the Lord. Thus the
perfection of those ahilities is to he engaged in the Lord's devotional service.
1.   Energy of Eniightenment: Spiritual eniightenment is possible hy the mercy of the
spiritual energy of the Lord. Chanting the Hare Krsna mantra first addresses the
spiritual energy of the Lord, Hare. This energy acts when a living entity fully
surrenders, accepting his position as an eternal sérvkor (4.9.6 P).
Special Verses
2.   Revealed Prayers: Without revelation by the spiritual energy, one cannot offer
prayers. Philosophical speculation or poetic expression hy mundane persons is still
considered only the action and reaction of the matériái energy (4.9.6 P).
3.   T h e process of purifying the senses is bhakti, or devotional service. In the
beginning, the senses are engaged under the direction of the spiritual master and
sdstra (in a mechanical way), and after reaíization (with spiritual understanding),
when the same senses are purified, the engagement continues (4.9.6 P).
4.   Spiritual Senses: Seeing that all his senses had suddenly become inclined to the
Lord, he understood that the Lord had made all his senses spiritual (4.9.6 V ) .
5.   Astonishment: Appreciating the incomparable, unconditional mercy of the Lord,
he offered respects with astonishment (4.9.6 V ) .
6.   Waking Spirit: " B y your cit-sakti {sva-dhámná), you have brought to life the
power of speaking in me, so that it can describe your form, qualities and
activities. That speech has until now been sleeping, as if dead." (4.9.6 V ) .
7.   Sleeping Matter: " A n d from now on, you should put to sleep, or destroy, that
power of speech which was awake in describing matériái enjoyment of eating and
drinking." (4.9.6 V ) .
m}mMMMíMMÉ2§9llltmmm^
I 2 . UNPARALLELED BLÍS
'£sxrvs
yá nirvrtis tanu-bhrtáih tava páda-padma-
dhyánád bhavaj-jana-kathá-sravanena vá syát
sá brahmani sva-mahimany api nátha má hhüt
k i m tv antakási-lulitát patatám vimánát
" M y Lord (nátha), the transcendental bliss (yá nirvrtis) derived from
meditating upon Your lotus feet (tava páda-padma-dhyánád)           or (vá)
hearing about Your glories (kathá-sravanena)             from pure devotees
(bhavaj-jana) is so unlimited that it is far heyond the stage of
brahmánanda,     wherein one thinks himself mérged in the impersonal
Brahman as one with the Supreme. Since brahmánanda (sá brahmani) is
also defeated hy the transcendental bliss (sva-mahimany api) derived
from devotional service, then what to speak of (kim tv) the temporary
blissfulness of elevating oneself to the heavenly planets (implied), which
is ended hy the separating sword of time (antakási-lulitát)} Although
one may be elevated to the heavenly planets, he falls down (patatám
vimánát) in due course of time." [4.9.10]
Background: I n the previous prayer, Dhruva mentioned how the Lord gives freedom
from birth and death (bhavápyaya-vimoksanam),             and thus, one may think that the
result of worshipping the Lord is impersonal liberation or merging into Brahman.
Therefore Dhruva clarifies this misconception in this verse (4.9.10 V ) .
1.   T h e Highest Reaíization: The personalists' reaíization of the Ahsolute Truth is
far greater than that of the impersonalists, what more then, of ordinary
religionists, who still desire matériái satisfaction (4.9.10 V ) .
2.    Bhakta and hhakti glorified: The desireless state of the devotee and the self-
manifesting nature of bhakti are shown in this verse (4.9.10 V ) .
3. Bliss:
(i) Gradation: Bliss of devotees (desire hearing and chanting) -> Yogis (desire
liberation) -> Karmis (desire heavens) (4.9.10 P).
(ii) Ocean: The Lord is an ocean of happiness [nirvána-sukhárnaváya)          compared
to the happiness of mere liberation. 4.9.10 is quoted to prove this (Bhagavat-
sandarbha Anuccheda 46).
(iii) Service: Devotees who are absorbed in the bliss of service to the lotus feet of
Krsna should never desire liberation (BRS 1.2.29).
(iv) Greatest: The bliss of realising the personal form of God is not present in
Brahman, which has unusual greatness (sva-mahimani) [Bhagavat-sandarbha
Anuccheda 45 and Durgama-sahgamani-tika of BRS 1.2.29).
(v) F i x e d F o r m : Brahman is a form of the Lord's greatness (sva-mahimani), hut
that greatness is spread out everywhere (not in a form). Thus, since a person
can attain bliss by being fixed on the Lord's personal form, what bliss can
there be in Brahman? (Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura's Bhakti-rasdmrta-
sindhu-bindu-tika on BRS 1.2.29)
4.    Results:
(i) Valuable: Results of devotional service are far more valuable than merging
into the Ahsolute or being elevated to the heavenly planets (4.9.10 P)
(ii) T h e actual fruit of bhakti is only bhakti unto the Lord. Bhakti, being
desireless, spontaneously hears its fruit as premá.    (4.9.10 and Visvanatha
Cakravartí Thakura's Bhakti-rasámrta-sindhu-bindu-tika     on BRS 1.2.29).
5.    Definitions:
(i) Antakási-lulitát: By the sword of time one is cut from his exalted position
within this matériái world, and he comes down again (4.9.10 P)
(ii) Patatáth vimánát: Vimána means "airplane." Those who are elevated to the
heavenly planets are like airplanes, which drop when they run out of fuel
(4.9.10 P)
6.    Other examples of devotees (like Hanumán, Satyavrata Muni, Sridhara SvámI,
Prahláda, Kulasekhara) praying to the Lord simply to be engaged in His service
and nothing else are found in 3.4.15, 3.25.34, 3.25.36, 4.8.22, 4.9.10, 4.20.24,
BRS 1.1.38. ( C C Adi 6.42 P).
7.    Desires: Unalloyed devotion makes the desire for liberation appear insignificant
6 WM                                 3. Endearing To Lord Siva
yah páram ramhasah sáksát
tri-gunáj jiva-sarhjnitát
hhagavantam vásudevam
prapannah sa priyo hi me
" A n y person {yah) who is surrendered {prapannah) to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead {bhagavantam), Krsna {vásudevam), the
controller of everything {pararh ramhasah)—matériái nature {tri-gunát)
as well as the living entity {jíva-sarhjhitát)—is actually very dear to me
{sa priyo hi me)." [4.24.28]
Context: While the Pracetás were going to do penance to please the Supreme Lord,
Lord Siva appeared before them and said that out of mercy he had shown himself to
them. In this verse. Lord Siva explains why he was merciful to the Pracetás.
Srila Prabhupáda's comments
•   Rare Darsana: Lord Siva and persons who are fully surrendered unto Vásudeva
are rarely seen by common men {sa mahátmd sudurlabhah).
•   Lord Siva openly proclaims that one who is a devotee of Lord Vásudeva, who is
surrendered to Lord Krsna, is actually very dear to him.
•   Sáksát means "directly." The contention that surrendering unto demigods is
equal to surrender unto Lord Visnu is denied heréin because if it were true. Lord
Siva would have said to surrender unto himself.
•   Conclusion: A devotee of Lord Siva is not dear to Lord Siva, but a devotee of
Lord Krsna is very dear to Lord Siva.
Visvanatha Cakravartí Thakura's comments
•    Sáksát: Persons who fully surrender to Vásudeva (unalloyed devotees) are dearer
to Lord Siva than mixed devotees, who offer their karmas, worship other
devatds, or are ringed with jndna.
Other Citations
•   Vaisnavánám yathá samhhuh: "One who disrespects Lord Siva is not
considered a follower of Lord Caitauya." 4.24.28 is quoted to show how Lord
Siva is dear to the Vaisnavas. (Sarasvati Thakura's commentary on CB Antya-
khanda 1.243)
mMjMmiMMmm                                            4. Watering The Root
4 . WATERING T H E R O O T
yathá taror müla-nisecanena
trpyanti tat-skandha-bhujopasákháh
pránopahárác ca yathendriyánám
tathaiva sarvárhanam acyutejyá
" A s (yathá) pouring water on the root {müla-nisecanena) of a tree
(taroh) energizes the trunk (skandha), branches (bhuja), twigs
(upasdkháh) and everything else, and as (yathd) supplying food to
the stomach (upahdrdt) enlivens (prdna) the senses and limbs of
the body (indriydndm), simply worshipping the Supreme
Personality of Godhead through devotional service (arhanam
acyutejyá) automatically satisfies the demigods, who are parts of
that Supreme Personality. [4.31.14]
Context: This verse is part of Nárada Muni's instructions to the Pracetás in spiritual
science. This verse shows that by satisfying the Supreme Lord through devotional
service, all demigods are automatically satisfied.
Srila Prabhupáda's comments
•   W h y only Krsna? Sometimes people ask why this Krsna consciousness
movement simply advocates worship of Krsna and excludes the demigods. The
answer is given in this verse. Krsna is the root of everything - therefore
tendering service to H i m (krsna-sevd) means automatically serving all the
demigods.
W h y not K r s n a and demigods together? If one tries to feed his eyes or ears
independently, instead of supplying food to the stomach, the result is only havoc.
It is neither necessary nor feasible to rendet separate service to the individuai
senses.
mmMMmM.MimMíimM.MmM.MMM'Mm
•   B h a k t i is independent: Although karma and jndna cannot be successful without
bhakti, bhakti does not require the help of karma and jndna.
•   Similar verse: krsne bhakti kaile sarva-karma krta haya - if one is engaged in the
devotional service of the Lord, everything is automatically accomplished.
( C C Madhya 11.61)
Other Citations of 4.31.14
•   Best Recipient: "Learned persons have concluded that only the Supreme Lord is
the best person unto whom everything must be given." 4.31.14 is quoted to
substantiate this. (7.14.34 P)
•   A devotee is faultless: A devotee is not required to engage in fruitive activities,
nor can there be any discrepancies in his performance of sacrifices, because by
worshipping Lord Acyuta, he satisfies everyone. Bali Maharaja is an important
example for this. (8.23.14 P)
•   N o debt for a devotee: 11.5.41 says that one who worships the Supreme Lord is
never indehted to these six persoualities - devas (demigods), rsis (sages), bhütas
(living entities), dptas (relatives), nrndm (people in generál), pitfs (forefathers).
4.31.14 is quoted to validate this statement. (11.5.41 P)
•   Watering the leaves: "Worshipping demigods while disregarding Krsna is like
watering the leaves of a tree after cutting its root." Srila Bhaktisiddhánta
Sarasvati Thákura quoted 4.31.14 in his purport to substantiate this.
(CB Madhya-khanda 19.204)
•    Rejection of matériái dharma: The perfection of dharma, according to
varndsrama is to please the Lord. Since all dharmas are perfected by bhakti, the
necessity for the devotees to perform dharma is rejected. 4.31.14 substantiates
this. (1.2.13 V )
•   Real Faith: "One should be convinced that simply by serving the Supreme Lord,
Sri Krsna, one can achieve all perfection - that is real faith." 4.31.14 is quoted to
substantiate this statement in B G 9.3, which talks about the destination of
faithless people. (BG 9.3 P)
•   T h e Supersoul is the root: yathd hi skandha-sdkhdndrh... When one pours water
on the root of a tree, the trunk and branches of the tree are automatically
pleased. Similarly, when one becomes a devotee of Lord Visnu, everyone is
served, for the Lord is the Supersoul of everyone. (8.5.49)
•    Caitauya Mahaprabhu quotes verse 4.31.14, in his explanation of devotional
service to Sanátana Gosvámí ( C C Madhya 22.63)
>2
THEMATIC
COMPILATIONS
mtcmmíMmmíMmmmMMMMímMMím
Thematic Compilations
mm            mn. mm'M 'mm:
^1^
il^^f              nT*-              Xk-         ^     feik   -^ir^^
THEMATIC COMPILATIONS
"•^>7^>*Á r ' - ' r 'v/j Jí^^3»TA*^4.*^^
1 . Glories of Bhakti-yoga            231
2. Glories of Krsna-katha              236
3. C o m m o n Aspiration of Devotees                    239
4. Association of Devotees              242
5. Prayers - A Supplication for Grace                    244
6 . Gratitude           246
7. Eagerness for Renunciation               249
8. Anger          252
«2«l^í'Ö9lí''Ő*^r'^^^^                                    1 • Glories of Bhakti-yoga
>'^---i3Xjjéé\,,X'Ly'!f-'-t3'..yéé\^^^
1 . GLORIES O F BHAKTI-YOGA
As a spotless Purdna, the Srtmad-Bhdgavatam recommends a spotless solution for the
predicament of the suffering souls in this matériái existence. Bhakti-yoga, the process
of devotional service is that spotless solution. Various persoualities in different
episodes of the Bhdgavatam glorify this process as the topmost process for pleasing
the Supreme Lord. Bhakti-yoga is glorified in various ways - by describing its effect
on practitioners, by comparing it with other processes like karma and jndna, by
giving examples of successful practitioners, by mentioning how it is dear to the
Supreme Lord, etc.
In the Fourth Canto we also find many episodes that bring out the glories of bhakti-
yoga and they have been compiled here to inspire the reader to delve deeper into the
subject matter. These verses are duly categorized into relevant sections. Only the
main themes have been given; the reader may appreciate them at a glancé and then
refer to the verses and their explanations by the dcdryas to understand them more
deeply.
BHAKTI DEVELOPS O N E ' S ATTACHMENT T O THE SUPREME LORD
1.   Attachment for the Supreme can be increased by practising devotional service,
inquiring, worshipping, etc. These actions are pious in themselves.
[4.22.22 sd sraddhayd bhagavad-dharma-caryayá...]
2.   One's love and devotion unto the Supreme Lord becomes unflinching and fixed.
[4.23.10 bhagavad-dharminah sddhoh... and 4.22.26 yadd ratir brahmani...]
3. Bhakti is the only way to please the Lord.
[4.29.49 ástirya darbhaih prág-agraih...]
4. The practice of bhakti gives rise to bhdva which leads to the association of the Lord.
[4.8.61 viraktas cendriya-ratau...]
5. By intense bhakti, Dhruva saw the Lord in everything and everything in the Lord.
[4.12.11 sarvdtmany acyute 'sarve...]
6. One transcends the matériái qualities, and is easily fixed in transcendence.
[4.22.25 harer muhus tatpara-karna-püra...]
Thematic Compilations
BHAKTI AWARDS LIBERATION
7.  One achieves the final objective of life by performing devotional service.
[4.21.33 tam eva yüyarh bhajatdtma-vrttibhir...]
8. If a living entity is Krsna conscious, merciful to others, and if his spiritual knowledge
of self-realization is perfect, he will immediately attain liberation.
[4.29.1b bhaktih krsne dayá jivesv...]
9. By practice of devotional service one burns up one's matériái subtle body exactly as
fire, arising from wood, burns the wood itself.
[4.22.26 yadd ratir brahmani naisthiki pumán...]
10. Devotional service situates the Lord in the heart and thus frees one from samsára.
[4.8.22 tam eva vatsásraya bhrtya-vatsalam...]
11. Persons who constantly meditate upon the Lord surpass the course of birth and
death. This perfection is very difficult to achieve.
[4.9.52 abhyarcitas tvayá nünarh...]
12. Once having taken shelter at the root of the Lord's lotus feet, a devotee cleanses his
mind of all mentái speculation and never comes back to matériái existence.
[4.21.32 vinirdhutásesa-mano-malah pumán...]
13. By bhakti one can cross over the insurmountable illusory energy of máyá.
[4.20.32 ity ádi-rájena nutah sa visva-drk...]
14. By taking shelter of the boát of Lord's lotus feet, one can cross over the ocean of
nescience infested with many dangerous sharks.
[4.22.40 krcchro mahán iha bhavárnavam aplavesárh...]
BHAKTI FULFILS ALL DESIRES
15. For those who engage in bhakti, there is nothing which is not available.
[4.23.27 tesárh duráparh kirh tv anyán...]
16. Being fixed in bhakti, one can acquire whatever he wants from the Lord.
[4.24.77 vindate puruso 'mtismád...]
17. Those who desire even purusárthas should worship the Lord.
[4.8.41 dharmártha-káma-moksákhyarh... ]
18. By sincere and serious devotional service, the Lord fulfils even matériái desires.
[4.8.59-60 evarh káyena manasá...]
BHAKTI REMOVES MISERIES AND FEAR
19. By taking shelter of the Lord's lotus feet one can transcend all accusation.
[4.7.29 tava varada varáhghráv ásisehákhilárthe...]
20. Remembrance of the Lord makes one free from the fire of this matériái world.
[4.7.35 ayam tvat-kathdmrsta-piyüsa-nadyám...]
21. The Lord extinguishes suffering.
[4.8.23 nányam tatah padma-palása-locanád...]
22. Bhakti in the association of devotees enables one transcend all matériái suffering.
[4.9.11 bhaktim muhuh pravahatdm tvayi me prasango...]
23. Those who perform devotional service are easily freed from samsára.
[4.12.6 bhajasva bhajaniydnghrim...]
24. My devotee who is connected with Me in intense friendship and affection, being
completely in knowledge, is never agitated by matériái happiness and distress.
[4.20.12 bhinnasya lingasya guna-pravdho...]
25. One who wants freedom from fear must take to the process of bhakti-yoga.
[4.24.53 etad rüpam anudhyeyam...]
26. One who is engaged in bhakti has not the least fear of matériái existence.
[4.29.51 sa uai priyatamas cdtmá...\
27. Those who practice bhakti, even though participating in family life, are not affected
by the results of their actions. [4.30.19 grhesv dvisatdm cdpi...]
REMOVES MATERIAL CONTAMINATION
28. Meditation on the Lord very soon frees one from all material contamination.
[4.8.52 evam bhagavato rüpam...]
29. Being fully engaged in bhakti, one becomes transcendental to material enjoyment.
[4.30.18 atha mayy anapdyinyd...\
30. Devotees attached to the Lord's lotus feet do not desire anything material.
[4.9.36 na vai mukundasya paddravindayo...]
31. By bhakti one forgets the falsé conception of " 1 " and "mine."
[4.11.30 tvarh pratyag-dtmani tadd bhagavaty ananta...]
32. Bhakti-yoga burns away all dirty, material things like fire. It enables one to see
nothing but the Supreme Lord, and the pure jiva engaged in bhakti.
[4.13.8-9 dtmdnarh brahma nirvánám...]
33. The inclination to sérve (sevd) cleanses the dirt accumulated in the mind and bhakti
increases more and more.
[4.21.31 yat-pdda-sevdbhirucis tapasvindm...]
34. Association of devotees removes attachment to the body and bodily relationships.
[4.9.12 te na smaranty atitardrh priyam isa martyam...]
35. Bhakti frees one from the clutches of the falsé ego and the material conception of life.
mMMmMMWMmMMWMMWMmi
Thematic Compilations      |ÖCÍClB0O^jíí^f3^
[4.23.11 tasyánayá bhagavatah parikarma-suddha...]
36. Bhakti completely cleanses one's heart, and one who is favoured by Bhaktidevi, does
not become bewildered by the external energy.
[4.24.59 na yasya cittam bahir-artha-vibhramam...]
37. Those who engage in pure devotional service get free from all material desires.
[4.9.17 satydsiso hi bhagavarhs tava pdda-padmam...]
BHAKTI AWARDS AUSPICIOUS QUALITIES
38. Devotional service brings unity.
[4.30.8 varam vrnidhvarh bhadram vo...]
39. By bhakti, one gives up all material activities and Vedic ritualistic performances.
14.29.46 yadd yasydnugrhndti...]
40. The Lord's form worshipped by the devotees can perfectly satisfy all the senses.
[4.1A.A4 darsanam no didrksündm...]
41. Those who perform bhakti are equipoised in all situations.
[4.30.20 navyavad dhrdaye yaj jho...]
42. One becomes satisfied within.
[4.20.09 yah sva-dharmena mdrh nityarh...]
43. Bhakti is fulfilling, just as the nectar from a parijdta tree satisfies a bee.
[4.30.32 pdrijdte 'njasd labdhe...]
SUPERIORITY O F BHAKTI
44. Bhakti brings greatest success even in material happiness and afterwards achieves
liberation, which is impossible by worshipping the demigods.
[4.8.21 átistha tat tata vimatsaras tvam...]
45. Association of the Lord's devotees can't be compared to attaining Svarga, mukti, or
earthly pleasures.
[4.30.34 tulaydma lavenápi...]
46. The bliss of bhakti surpasses even the bliss of brahmánanda and Svarga.
14.9.10 yá nirvrtis tanu-bhrtdjh tava páda-padma...\
47. By bhakti, one can attain the Vaikuntha planets, which are very difficult to achieve.
[4.11.11 sarva-bhütdtma-bhdvena...]
48. Devotees can easily overcome the hard-knotted desires for fruitive activities. But the
nondevotees (jhdnts and yogis) cannot.
[4.22.39 yat-páda-pahkaja-paldsa-vildsa-bhaktyd...]
Íu!>IÖílcM»M
1. Glories of Bhakti-yoga
*#t J t                  • " • l l l
JÍ.7WL.
49. By unalloyed bhakti, one is promoted to the spiritual planets. Lord Siva and other
demigods attain these planets after the destruction of this material world.
[4.28.29 sva-dharma-nisthah sata-janmabhih pumán...]
50. Bhakti is difficult even for liberated persons, but only bhakti can satisfy the Lord.
[4.24.55 tam durárádhyam árádhya...]
51. By even a moment's association of a devotee, one is no longer subjected to karma or
jnána. He becomes disinterested in the benedictions of the demigods.
[4.24.57 ksanárdhenápi tulaye...]
52. Without bhakti, all ahilities like mentái speculation, intelligence, etc, are useless.
[4.31.11 srutena tapasá vá kirh...]
53. The Lord accepts the worship of devotees and rejects the proud fruitive workers.
[4.31.21 na bhajati kumanisinárh sa ijyárh...]
54. The path of devotional service is most suitable and recommended.
[4.8.40 jananyábhihitah pantháh...]
GREAT PEOPLE PERFORM OR ASPIRE FOR BHAKTI
55. Even Brahmá achieved his position only by worshipping the Lord.
[4.8.20 yasyánghri-padmam paricarya visva...]
56. Dhruva attained the Lord's abode in just one life time by devotional service.
[4.9.28 sudurlabharh yat paramarh padarit harer...]
57. Liberated saintly persons take to bhakti, as it relieves one from the sarhsára illusion.
[4.20.29 bhajanty atha tvám ata eva sádhavo...]
58. Even the king of heaven is desirous of obtaining the ultimate goal of life - bhakti.
[4.24.54 bhaván bhaktimatálabhyo...]
59. Surrendered devotees of Lord Vásudeva are dear to great devotees like Lord Siva.
[4.24.28 yah pararh rarhhasah sáksát...]
C O N D E M N E D IF BHAKTI IS NOT PERFORMED
60. When one becomes devoid of knowledge and devotional service, he enters into species
of life like those of trees and stones.
[4.22.33 arthendriyárthábhidhyánarh...]
61. Knowledge and detachment are not possible without devotional service.
[A.29.36-37 athátmano 'rtha-bhütasya...]
62. People who don't take shelter of the Lord's feet suffer in sarhsára due to anarthas.
[4.7.28 utpatty-adhvany asarana uru-klesa-durge 'ntakogra...]
2. GLORIES O F KRSNA-KATHA
Everyone wants to hear something which is pleasing to the ears, mind and self.
Which is that subject matter which can please one in all ways? Sukadeva Gosvami
says in SB 2.1.2, "Those persons who are materially engrossed, being blind to the
knowledge of ultimate truth, have many subject matters for hearing in humán
society." There are thousands of subject matters to hear even within the realm of
spirituality, so how do we choose what to hear? I n the pages of Srimad-Bhagavatam,
the highest subject matter for hearing - krsna-kathd - which pleases everyone in all
respects is repeatedly presented along with its glories. I n the Fourth Canto of Srimad-
Bhagavatam, in many places and in many ways, the importance of krsna-kathd is
described and is compiled below to nourish all the readers in their experience of
hearing krsna-kathd.
KRSNA-KATHA INCREASES D E V O T I O N
1.   Attachment to the Lord will be increased.
[4.22.22 sd sraddhayd bhagavad-dharma-caryayd...]
2. Attachment to the Eord and detachment from the material world will be quickly
achieved by krsna-kathd, which are like ornamental decorations on the ears.
[4.22.25 harer muhus tatpara-karna-püra...]
3. One achieves bhakti.
[4.29.38 so 'cirád eva rájarse...]
4.   By hearing the pastime of Dhruva with faith and devotion, one attains pure devotion.
[4.12.46 srutvaitac chraddhaydbhiksnam...]
5. One's eternal relationship with the Lord is revived by hearing from great souls.
[4.20.25 sa uttamasloka mahan-mukha-cyuto...]
6. Krsna-kathd amongst the devotees is beneficial for everyone's real happiness.
\A.11.\9 sangamah khalu sádhündm...]
7. Those who hear about Prthu Maharaja attain the Vaikuntha planets.
[4.23.31 ya idath sumahat punyam...]
2. Glories of Krsna-katha
8. The narrations about Prthu Maharaja enhance one's devotional attitűdé, faith and
attraction for the Lord's lotus feet.
[4.23.38 vaicitravtryábhihitarit..., 4.23.39 anudinam idam ádarena srnvan...]
9. Hearing Rudra-gita pleases the Lord, invokes His mercy and fixes one in bhakti.
By attentively chanting it, one achieves the greatest perfection of life without delay.
[4.24.74 athedam nityadá...; 4.24.76-77 ya imarii sraddhayd..., vindate puruso...]
10. Glorification of the Lord cleanses lusty desires from the core of the heart.
[4.22.20 asty eva rdjan bhavato madhudvisah...]
11. By discussions about the Lord, one becomes free from hankering (at least for the time
being), envy and anxiety.
[4.30.35 yatredyante kathd mrstds...]
12. Chanting and facilitating others to hear Rudra-gita frees one from bondage of karma.
[4.24.78 idam yah kalya utthdya...]
13. Simply by chanting the Lord's holy name, one can surpass all obstacles.
[4.7.47 sa prasida tvam asmdkam dkdnksatdm...]
14. By hearing the pastime of Dhruva, one will be free from all sinful reactions.
[4.12.45 dhanyarh yasasyam dyusyarii...]
Diminishes Miseries
15. Hearing the narration of Dhruva Maharaja diminishes the threefold miseries.
[4.12.46 srutvaitac chraddhaydbhiksnam...]
16. When one constantly hears from pure devotees, one is not affected by hunger, thirst,
fear, lamentation and illusion.
[4.29.40 tasmin mahan-mukharitd...]
17. The holy name of the Lord is as powerful as the Lord Himself. By chanting and
hearing the holy name, one will be fully protected from fierce death.
[4.10.30 auttdnapdda bhagavdms tava sdrngadhanvd...]
Dispels Illusion
18. One will be delivered from illusion.
[4.7.44 tvan-máyaydrtham abhipadya kalevare 'smin...]
19. Unless the yogis and jndnis become attracted to krsna-kathd, their illusions
concerning existence can never be dispelled.
[4.23.12 chinndnya-dhir adhigatdtma-gatir nirihas...]
Thematic Compilations      Íjí|10f^OI0íl0íl^
KRSNA-KATHA A L S O GIVES SECONDARY BENEFITS
20. By hearing the pastime of Dhruva, one will gain exalted qualities, wealth, reputation,
longevity, greatness, prowess or influence, heaven, or even Dhurvaloka.
[4.12.45 dhanyarh yasasyam áyusyarh...]
[4.12.47 mahattvam icchatárh tirtharh...]
21. By hearing the pastime of Prthu - one will become perfect in one's várna, achieves -
wealth, offspring, fame, scholarship, fortune, longevity, heaven, victory.
[4.23.32-39 bráhmano brahma-varcasvi...]
22. By chanting the Rudra-gita one will achieve all desired objectives without fail.
[4.2A.79 gitath mayedam naradeva-nandanáh...]
EVEN GREAT PERSONALITIES DESIRE T O HEAR KRSNA-KATHA
23. Sanat-kumára instructed that one should mold his life in such a way that he cannot
live in peace without drinking the nectar of krsna-kathd.
[4.22.23 arthendriydrdma-sagosthy-atrsnayd... j
24. Laksmi accepts the perfection of chanting and hearing krsna-kathd.
[4.20.26 yasah sivam susrava drya-sahgame...]
25. Dhruva prayed for the association of devotees to hear krsna-kathd.
[4.9.11 bhaktith muhuh pravahatdm tvayi me prasango...]
26. Prthu desired millions of ears to hear krsna-kathd from the mouths of pure devotees,
so that he could hear krsna-kathd happening in many places.
[4.20.24 na kdmaye ndtha tad apy aham kvacin...]
27. Lord Siva instructed Pracetás to chant the Lord's glories (Rudra-gita).
[4.24.71 yogddesam updsddya...]
28. Pracetás requested the Lord the association of the devotees engaged in krsna-kathd.
[4.30.33 ydvat te mdyayá sprstd...]
SUPREMACY OF HEARING KRSNA-KATHA
29. Bliss of hearing krsna-kathd is far greater than brahmdnanda or heavenly pleasures.
[4.9.10 yd nirvrtis tanu-bhrtdrh tava pdda-padma...\
30. Prthu preferred hearing of the Lord than merging into Brahman.
[4.20.24 na kdmaye ndtha tad apy aham kvacin...]
31. If one hears krsna-kathd in the association even once, he does not give it up, uniess he
is an animál. [4.20.26 yasah sivam susrava drya-sahgame...]
3. Common Aspirations of Devotees
3 . C O M M O N ASPIRATIONS O F DEVOTEES
The Fourth Canto is fiiled with notable characters that give insight into developing
meaningful aspirations in life. They express these in their prayers. Predominant
themes are to aspire for: the association of devotees, attainment of the Lord's lotus
feet, and devotional service, by contrasting them with other "benedictions" such as
liberation or heavenly achievements. They also present the significance of such ideál
aspirations. The following is a Üst of desires expressed by various devotees.
1 . ASSOCIATION O F DEVOTEES AND HEARING ABOUT T H E LORD
Dhruva Mahárája
1.   Transcendental bliss is derived from meditating upon the Lord's lotus feet or
hearing from His devotees.
[4.9.10 yd nirvrtis tanu-bhrtárh tava pdda-padma...]
2.   Bless me with the association of devotees, who constantly engage in Your loving
service, so that I will be able to cross the nescient ocean of material existence.
[4.9.11 bhaktirh muhuh pravahatdrh tvayi me prasango...]
3.   If a person happens to associate with a devotee, he is never attached to the
material body or bodily relations.
[4.9.12 te na smaranty atitardrh priyam isa martyarh...]
Prthu Mahárája
4.   I want at least one millión ears, to hear Your glories from Your pure devotees.
[4.20.24 na kdmaye ndtha tad apy aharh kvacin...]
5. I only want to hear from pure devotees, because the transcendental vibration
from their mouths carries the aroma of the saffron dust of the Lord's lotus feet
which awakens the eternal relationship with the Lord.
[4.20.25 sa uttamasloka mahan-mukha-cyuto...]
6.   If one, in the association of pure devotees, hears even once, he does not give up
that association, unless he is an animál.
mmMmMMWjMmimm:0mímMMMM
Thematic compilations      ÍACI^IMICI^MIA^^^^
[4.20.26 yasah sivam susrava       árya-sangame...]
Lord Siva
7.   Even a fraction of a moment's association                with   a devotee   makes   one
disinterested in the results of karma or jnána.
[4.24.57 ksanárdhenápi tulaye na svargam ndpunar-bhavam...]
8.   T h e real benediction of the Lord is the association of H i s devotees.
[4.24.58 athánaghdnghres tava kirti-tirthayor...]
Pracetás
9. We pray for the association of those engaged in discussing Your pastimes, as long
as we are in this world, life after life, in different bodily forms and planets.
[4.30.33 ydvat te mdyayá sprstá bhramáma iha karmabhih...]
10. Even a moment's association with a pure devotee cannot be compared to Svarga
or liberation. It is the highest benediction.
[4.30.34 tulayáma lavenápi na svargam ndpunar-bhavam...]
11. Meeting with devotees, who wander all over the world to purify even the holy
places, is very pleasing to a fearful person.
[4.30.37 tesdm vicaratdm padbhydm... tdvakdndrh samdgamah]
12. By a moment's association with Lord Siva, we have been fortunate to attain Y o u .
[4.30.38 vayam tu sdksdd bhagavan bhavasya...]
T H E LORD'S L O T U S FEET
Dhruva Mahárája
1.   Worshipping Your lotus feet is better than the position of a king. Y o u are the
causeiessly merciful maintainer, just like a cow maintains a calf. (The Lord should
let me have a taste of the sweetness of bhakti at H i s lotus feet - 4.9.17 V )
[4.9.17 satydsiso hi bhagavarhs tava pdda-padmam...]
Prthu Mahárája
2.   I wish to engage in the service of the Lord's lotus feet like the goddess of fortune.
[4.20.27 athdbhaje       tvdkhila-pürusottamam...]
Lord Síva
3.   H o w could any learned person give up worshipping Your lotus feet? Even
Brahmá, and the fourteen Manus unhesitatingly worshipped Y o u .
[4.24.67 kas tvat-paddbjam vijahdti pandito...]
*2^r'©MÍ)í'Sí^^^- * x ' " ' i x l C i 2
*''-'^'' -*''^'"'*
*2if        3. Common Aspirations of Devotees
íjiJD^s^TiREST IN LiBERATiotsiAMB HEAVENLY PLEASURES,
Dhruva Mahárája
1.    The transcendental bliss of meditating upon the Lord's lotus feet or hearing is far
heyond the stage of brahmánanda or the pleasures in heaven.
[4.9.10 yá nirvrtis tanu-bhrtárh tava páda-padma...]
Prthu Mahárája
2. Why should any learned person ask Y o u for henedictions meant for living entities
hewildered by the modes of nature? Y o u can certainly bestow merging into Your
existence, hut I do not wish to have such a benediction.
[4.20.23 varán vibho tvad varadesvarád budhah...]
3.   I do not wish to have the benediction of merging into Your existence, where there
is no existence of the nectarean beverage of Your lotus feet.
[4.20.24 na kdmaye ndtha tad apy aharh kvacin...]
4.   I don't want any material benefits. Please bestow upon me what You think is hest
for me, as a father does for his son.
[4.20.31 tvan-mdyaydddhd jana isa khandito...]
The Pracetás
5. We are satisfied that Your Lordship is the ultimate goal of our lives, and we pray
that You will be satisfied with us. That is our benediction.
[4.30.30 asdv eva varo 'smdkam ipsito jagatah pate...]
wtíwtímwiím
Thematic: Compilations    Q£|0|>|CCÍ^1^^^
4 . ASSOCIATION O F DEVOTEES
The auspiciousness of Vaisnava sanga has been repeatedly mentioned in the Fourth
Canto. For example, while praying for the benediction of the association of the
Lord's devotees. Lord Siva mentions that the real benediction or mercy of the
Supreme Lord is the association of devotees - syát sangamo anugraha esa nas tava
(4.24.58). This compilation highlights the various aspects of this most essential topic.
GLORIES O F THE ASSOCIATION O F DEVOTEES
1.   \Vhat is association?: Sádhu-sanga, or association with a devotee means always
engaging in Krsna consciousness by chanting the Hare Krsna mantra and by acting
for Krsna (4.24.59 P).
2.   Admonishment: If one hears the Lord's glories with the devotees, one never wants to
leave that association, unless he is an animál (4.20.26 yasah sivam susrava...).
3.   Highest: Bliss derived from hearing about the Lord from devotees is not present in
brahmánanda or in heavenly pleasures (4.9.10 yá nirvrtis tanu-bhrtárh...).
4.   Liberation: A moment's association with a pure devotee cannot be compared to being
transferred to the heavenly planets or even merging into the Brahman effulgence in
complete liberation (4.30.34 tulaydma lavenápi na svargarh...).
5.   Deliverance: One will easily cross the ocean of material existence by hearing in the
association of devotees (4.9.11 bhaktirh muhuh pravahatdrh...).
6.   Detachment: A person who happens to associate with a devotee, is never attached to
the material body or bodily relations (4.9.12 te na smaranty atitardm...).
7.   Benediction: Association with pure devotees is the highest benediction (4.30.34).
8. Advancement:
• Bhaktas: Association is the cause of the development of further bhakti (4.9.11 P).
• Yogís: Simply by associating with a pure devotee one becomes more advanced in
spiritual consciousness than any yogi (4.9.12 P).
•1. Assnrialioii of I K-volcos
• Karmis: The materialist is benefited by the association of devotees because his life
then becomes regulated and his chance of becoming a devotee increases (4.22.19 P)
9.   Crucial: The association of devotees (drya-sangama) is the most important factor in
this world (4.20.26 P).
10. Awakening: The transcendental vibration from the devotees carries the aroma of the
saffron dust of the Lord's lotus feet, which awakens one's eternal relationship with
the Lord (4.20.25 sa uttamasloka mahan-mukha-cyuto...).
11. Glorious: By association, the spirit soul is immediately situated in his own glory by
understanding his constitutional position as the Lord's eternal servant (4.22.20 P).
12. Real life begins when the travelling living entity is fortunate enough to be blessed by
the association of devotees and come to Krsna consciousness (4.25.11 P).
13. Even a little: Lven by a fraction of a moment's association, one is no longer subject
to the attraction of the results of karma or jndna (4.24.57 ksandrdhendpi... and
4.30.34 tulaydma lavendpi...). Example: The Pracetás (4.30.38 vayam tu sdksdd...).
14. Pleasing: Meeting the devotees, who wander all over the world to purify even holy
places, is most pleasing to a fearful person (4.30.37 tesdrh vicaratdrh padbhydrh...).
Illllllll^^                      O F ASSOCIATION WITH
1.   Lven fallen souls get elevated (4.2.14-15 P).
2. One can be elevated to the platform of self-realization (4.4.26 P).
3. The words of Krsna become fully potent and relishable to the heart and ear (4.9.11 P)
4. One matures in devotional service (4.9.11 P).
5. Bhakti is not complete and relishable without the association of devotees. (4.9.11 P).
6.   One understands the importance of the character and pastimes of the Lord and His
devotees (4.12.48 P).
7.   The living entity gets free from the contamination of material existence (4.29.29 P).
8.  One becomes faithful and devoted to the Lord, as well as attached to hearing and
chanting His glories. Thus full Krsna consciousness is quickly attained (4.29.39-40 P).
9. The dirty things within the heart of a materialistic man are gradually washed away
(4.22.20 P).
10. One is saved from the material conditions of life (4.21.27 P).
11. One becomes perfectly pure in heart (4.24.59 P).
12. One becomes completely happy, though living within the material world (4.30.34 P).
13. One attains the Lord (4.30.38).
14. One cannot advance in Krsna consciousness without association (4.12.37 P).
JhgmaJicCompilationsJg^^^
5 . PRAYERS
A Supplication For Grace
Prayer is an important eiement in one's devotional service through which a devotee
expresses his heartfelt realizations, aspirations and appreciation for the Lord's mercy. The
following table gives a bird's eye view of the prayers offered by various devotees
mentioned in Canto Lour. Please refer to the detailed overview of these prayers in the
Overview section of this book.
Personality   Situation              Purpose       Theme                Result
1   Demigods      Onthe                  To glorify    May the Lord,        The Lord glanced
[4.1.56-57]   appearance of          the Lord on   who created this     upon them with
Nara-Náráyana          His           world as well as     mercy.
Rsis in the house      appearance.   peace and
of Dharma.                           prosperity,
mercifully glancé
upon us.
2   Brahmá        When Daksa's           To revive     Brahmá glorified     Lord Siva
[4.6.42-53]   head was cut off,      the           Lord Siva as the     restored the limbs
the demigods           incomplete    form of Sadásiva     of the injured
approached             sacrifice     in the mood of       persons with
Brahmá who took        and restore   Saivites.            compromise.
them to Kailása        the limbs
and prayed to          of the
Siva.                  injured
persons.
3   Assembled     The Lord               To glorify    Various themes       The Lord
Members       appeared upon          the Lord      from the             instructed on the
in Daksa's    Daksa's resuming       upon His      perspectives of      exalted position
sacrifice     the sacrifice after    appearance    different assembly   of Brahmá and
[4.7.26-47]   he got the head of     in the        members. Somé        Siva as His
goat.                  sacrifice     are pure and somé    gundvatáras. The
are pointing out     sacrifice was
faults in others.    completed
successfully.
m
mm..                     LÍCA:                                          5. Prayers
Dhruva       The Lord             To engage    His own humble                    The Lord awarded
[4.9.6-17]   appeared in          in bhakti    situation;                        sovereignty for
response to          in the       Supremacy of                      36,000 years in
Dhruva's             association bhakti; Request                    this world;
austerities.         of devotees. for devotee                       Perpetual remem-
association;                      brance of the     !
Glories of the                    Lord; Dhruvaloka.
Lord.
5   Earth        When Prthu was       To'"'^"""'"^'""'""""''   The Lord as           Still Prthu was
determined to kill   convince                 creator, protector    not satisfied.
her to provide       King Prthu               and performer of      Then she offered
food for the         not to kill              inconceivable         the method to
citizens.            her.                     activities.           milk her and get
[4.17.29-36]                                                        various items.
6   King Prthu   When he stopped      To always                Rejection of          The Lord offered
the sacrifice,       sérve the                material pleasures    bhakti to King
following the        lotus feet               and liberation;       Prthu.
instructions of      of the Lord              Desire for millions
Brahmá.              and hear                 of ears to hear
[4.20.17-31]         krsna-                   from devotees and
kathd from               to sérve the Lord's
the                      feet like Laksmi;
devotees'                Request to bestow
mouths.                  what is best.
7   Lord Siva    While the            To glorify               Purification of the   The Pracetás
Pracetás were        and please               elements; Glories     recited these
going to do pen-     the Lord.                of the Lord's         prayers for
ance to please the                            form; Devotional      10,000 years
Supreme Lord,                                 service - request     under water.
Lord Siva being                               for association of    finally getting the
merciful to them                              devotees; The         Lord's darsana.
taught the Rudra-                             Lord's relationship
gita. [4.24.33-68]                            to this world.
The          After the Pracetás   To satisfy               Glories of the        The Lord grants
Pracetás     got darsana of       the Lord                 Lord and bhakti;      fulfilment of what
the Lord and the     and attain               Request for assoc-    the Pracetás had
Lord instructed      His lotus                iation of devotees;   prayed for (assoc-
them.                feet.                    Offering the          iation of devotees
[4.30.21-43]                                  results of their      - Nárada).
penances. ,
•"^'"•'1776"*%             t » 6     -lAf
'tAt' f I 'tAS' 11 *At«                    '.jyWy^.^'-.yV
Gratitude for the Supreme Lord's mercy is one of the qualities of the brahmanas and
Vaisnavas (4.21.44 P). A n opportunity for performing devotional service can only be
appreciated if one knows its value. Otherwise it is like a feast offered to a person who
is not hungry or an exquisite piece of jewelry offered to a blind person. Only a person
who is aware of his smallness and the Supreme Lord's greatness can be grateful for
an opportunity to rendet service to H i m . Without such gratitude there can be no
mellow in the relationship between the servitor and the ohject of service.
As explained by Lord Caitauya, jivera 'svarüpa' haya - krsnera 'nitya-ddsa' [ C C
Madhya 20.108]: the eternal function of the living entity is his servitude to the
Supreme Lord, which is the common prevailing principle in all mellows exchanged
between the Lord and His devotees. Gratitude is the foundation of such servitude. T o
inspire the reader, in this foundational quality of devotional service, various examples
from the Fourth Canto have been depicted below.
DAKSA TOWARDS L O R D SIVA
Background: Daksa's insulting words against Lord Siva were enough to have him
thrown perpetually into hellish life. But Siva, being kind towards him, awarded him
punishment to neutralize his offence. King Daksa realized this, and feeling obliged by
Lord Siva's magnanimous behaviour, wanted to show his gratitude. (4.7.15 P)
Gratitude: " I was going down to hell because of my disobedience to you, hut you
took compassion upon me and saved me hy awarding punishment." (4.7.15)
Comments: Being pardoned hy Lord Siva, Daksa, with the permission of Lord
Brahmá, again began the yajha (4.7.16). Sometimes a father punishes his child, and
when the child is grown up and comes to his senses, he understands that the father's
punishment was not actually punishment, but mercy (4.7.15 P).
6. Gratitude
DHRUVA T O W A R D S THE L O R D
Background: Dhruva Mahárája knew that he had come to worship the Lord in
devotional service with a motive - to get a kingdom like his father's. Such an
adnlterated devotee can never see the Supreme Personality of Godhead face to face.
He therefore felt very grateful for the causeless mercy of the Lord (4.9.17 P).
Gratitude:   " T o ignorant devotees    like me, Y o u are the causeiessly merciful
maintainer, just like a cow, who takes care of the newly horn calf by supplying milk
and giving it protection from attack." (4.9.17)
Comments:
•   The Lord fulfilled his ambitions desire, although it was difficult to fulfil (4.9.19).
•   The Lord is so merciful that He not only fulfils the desires of a devotee who is
driven hy ignorance and desires for material benefit, hut He also gives such a
devotee all protection, just as a cow gives milk to a newly horn calf. (4.9.17 P)
•   A devotee must he very sincere in his devotional service. Then, although there
may he many shortcomings on the devotee's part, Krsna will guide him and
gradually elevate him to the highest position of devotional service. (4.9.17 P)
DHRUVA T O W A R D S HIS MOTHER SUNÍTI
Background: It was Suniti who had given Dhruva the clue that later enahled him to
be personally carried to the Vaikuntha planet hy Lord Visnu's associates. She was his
patha-pradarsaka-guru. (4.12.32 P)
Gratitude: " H o w shall I go alone to the Vaikuntha planet and leave hehind my poor
mother?" (4.12.32)
Comments:
•   His mother, Suníti, was going forward in another pláne. (4.12.33)
•   A devotee who is completely dependent on the Supreme Lord can fulfil his wishes
by the grace of the Lord. (4.12.32 P)
•   Whenever a pure devotee thinks of anything, his wish is immediately fulfilled
(4.12.32 P)
M^mMmMimMMM^M^MMíjmM.Mim'm}.
T h ^ a t i c Compilations
1                            AT5Í
fii* ^         2éz,y**   ^JP?L„>**^fcA'í.^**^J?€>/*«
KING PRTHU TOWARDS THE F O U R KUMÁRAS
Background: After having instructed his citizens, Prthu Mahárája witnessed the four
Kumáras arriving, just as the Lord had predicted. The four Kumáras are very difficult
to see, even for the mystic yogis (4.22.7). Like the Supersoul, they are not easily
known (4.22.9). Mahárája Prthu offered his welcome with appropriate glorification
(4.22.12). He also showed gratitude to them hy thanking after they gave instructions.
Gratitude: " I do not know what kind of pious activity I performed for you to grace
me hy appearing hefore me without difficulty." (4.22.7)
" H o w can such persons, who have rendered unlimited service hy explaining the path
of self-realization in relation to the Lord, he repaid except hy földed palms containing
water for their satisfaction? Such great personalities can he satisfied only by their
own magnanimous activities" (4.22.47)
Comment: Although Mahárája Prthu's life was full of pious activities, still, out of
humility, he was wondering how it had been possihle for him to meet with the four
Kumáras (4.22.7 P).
T H E PRACETÁS T O W A R D S L O R D SIVA
Background: Executing the instruction of Lord Siva, the Pracetás chanted the Rudra-
gita and gained the audience of Lord Visnu. After being addressed by the Lord, they
offered their prayers and expressed their gratitude for Lord Siva's association.
Gratitude: " B y virtue of a moment's association with Lord Siva, we are ahle to take
shelter at Your lotus feet." (4.30.38)
Comment: T o get material henedictions from Lord Siva is not difficult, hut actually
these are not henedictions. The Pracetás attained the shelter of the lotus feet of Lord
Visnu. This is the real benediction. (4.30.38 P)
7. Eagerness For Renuncialion
7. EAGERNESS FOR RENUNCIATION
Rajarsis or saintly kings of the Vedic times never clung to their thrones till the fag
end of life. Srila Prahhupáda explains this in several purports. At the ripe age, great
devotee kings would renounce their kingly opulences and positions to dedicate the
rest of their lives for spiritual practices and attaining the ultimate goal of life. The
following are somé examples of great kings from the Fourth Canto who exemplified
such renunciation.
KiNG UTTÁNAPÁDA
Situation: When Dhruva hecame suitahly mature to rule with all ministerial
affirmation and affection for the citizens, Uttánapáda left the kingdom (4.9.66,
4.10.1 P).
Comments:
• This is the sign of rájarsi in contrast to the attached modern politicians (4.9.67 P).
• Spiritual reaíization is of utmost importance ahove all other work. Uttánapáda left
his kingdom even hefore Dhruva's marriage (4.10.1P).
KING DHRUVA
Mentality: After ruling for 36,000 years as per the Lord's desire, Dhruva Mahárája
realized that this cosmic manifestation bewilders living entities like a dream. Thus he
considered his body, wives, children, friends, army, treasury and palaces to he
creations of the illusory energy. Then he left his kingdom and retired to
Badarikásrama. (4.12.14-16)
Comments: The material world is like a gandharva-nagara, a phantasmagoria. A
devotee is interested in the spiritual world and not the material world, which is like a
mere shadow of the spiritual world. (4.12.15 P)
KING A N G A
Situation: King Anga was unabie to reform his mischievous son, Vena. Then he
thought that a had son is better than a good son because a good son creates
attachment for home, whereas a had son does not. Thinking like that, he left his
kingdom in the dead of night. (4.13.46-47)
Comments:
•   Blind well: According to Prahláda Mahárája, the material home is compared to a
blind well. If a man falls into a blind well, it is very difficult for him to get out
and begin life again. Therefore Prahláda Mahárája has advised that one give up
this blind well of family life as soon as possible and go to the forest to take shelter
of the Lord. (4.13.46 P)
•   Necessity: According to Vedic civilization, this giving up of the home by a
vánaprastha and sannyása, is compulsoty (4.13.46 P).
•   Detachment: Ultimately one has to leatn how to detach oneself from material
life. Therefore, if a had son helps a householdet to leave his home, that is a boon
(4.13.46 P).
•   Blessing: Material opulence is achieved by the hlessings of great souls. But
detachment     from opulence is an even greater        blessing hestowed hy them.
(4.13.47 P)
KING PRTHU
Situation: At the last stage of his life, Mahárája Prthu saw himself getting old. Then
he left for the forest along with his wife to perform austerities, while his citizens were
almost lamenting and crying from feelings of separation for him.
Comments:
•   One should not simply remain at home until the time of death, hut should
separate from family life at a timely moment and prepare himself to go hack to
Godhead. (4.23.1-3 P)
As a saktyavesa incarnation, Prthu left his kingdom to set an example.
(4.23.1-3 P)
t^llFt^SHtí t^^^                                    r. Eagerness For Renunciation
KING PRÁCÍNABARHI
Situation: Pracinabarhi, after hearing Purafiiana's allegory, thought to renounce, but
first wait for the return of his sons. Nárada Muni, however, gave further instructions
through the allegory of a deer to convince him to renounce immediately. After
hearing this, Prácínabarhi left orders for his sons and went off to perform austerities.
Comments:
•   Cannot he delayed: When Prácinaharhi was convinced of the goal of life, he did
not wait even a moment to see his sons return, but left immediately, as he
understood his prime duty was spiritual advancement. This is the system of Vedic
civilization. (4.29.81 P)
•   Hesitation: Most people accept a hona fide spiritual master and listen to him, but
when he indicates to leave home, they hesistate. (4.29.52 P)
•   Enlighten: The duty of the spiritual master is to instruct the disciple as long as he
does not come to the understanding that this materialistic way of life is not at all
beneficial. (4.29.52 P)
IlUjjjjjjjjjl^                      T H E PRACETÁS
Situation: Rememhering the hlessings of the Lord and having developed perfect
knowledge in spiritual consciousness, the Pracetás left home and put their wife
(Márisá) in charge of a perfect son (Daksa).
Comments: When the children are grown, the wife should be put in the children's
charge. The husband may then leave home to develop Krsna consciousness.
Everything depends on the development of mature knowledge (4.31.1 P).
Thematic Compilations
-o7to:——Xz3:tdjtZ~.Z^
The Vedic scriptures confirm that "Anger is like drinking poison." According to
Bhagavad-gítá 16.21, lust, anger and greed are the three gates to hell and a closer look
indicates that anger is an expression of unfulfilled desires, or lust ( B G 2.62). The
Srimad-Bhagavatam reveals more about the psychodynamics of anger and gives case
studies from its various characters. In the beginning of Chapter Eight Anger
(krodhah) is described to be horn of Greed [lobha) and Cunning (nikrti) in the
dynasty of Adharma. (Refer to the table on page 66). The episodes in Canto Four can
help US understand the detrimental effects that anger has on relationships with the
Supreme Lord and H i s devotees. Below is a synopsis on anger based on these
episodes.
CAUSES O F ANGER
1.   Expectations: Daksa expected Lord Siva, his son-in-law, to respect him by
standing up and welcoming him (4.2.8 P).
2. Judging on externals: Daksa was not very satisfied with Lord Siva, because he
considered him very poor and niggardly dressed (4.2.8 P).
3.   E n v y : Daksa, being materially püffed up, couldn't tolerate Lord Siva's high
position. Thus his anger toward Lord Siva for not standing in his presence was
only the final manifestation of his envy (4.3.21 P).
4.   Atmosphere: The material field is so unsteady that even personalities like
Nandisvara, Daksa, etc., were infected by the atmosphere of anger. They forgót
their positions, cursing and counter-cursing one another (4.2.20 P).
1.   Psychophysícal
•   Breathing heavily: Sati (4.4.3), Dhruva (4.8.14)
•   Biting lips: Lord Siva (4.5.2), Dhruva (4.8.15)
•   Fiery Glancé: Sati (4.4.9), Pracetás (4.30.44-45)
•   Mentái Impressions: When Lord Siva heard from his wife ahout Daksa, he
immediately rememhered the strong words spoken against him. (4.3.15)
•   Anger expressed through various limhs: Tongue —>• Maledictions; Hand —>
Fighting; Legs    Kicking (4.29.63)
2 . Behaviour
•   Ungratefui: Daksa did not even accept Brahmá as his father (4.2.16 P).
•   Fault-finding even in a faultless person (4.2.9-11).
•   Rehellion: Sati did not follow Siva's advice (4.4.3).
CONSEQUENCES
1.   Detrimental: Everyone at Daksa's sacrifice, including Lord Brahmá, requested
H i m not to be angry and leave their company. But in spite of all these requests, he
left. (4.2.19).
2.   Aggravation: Anger is such that if one increases it, it increases unlimitedly
(4.11.31).
3.   T e r r o r : One who falls under the control of anger becomes a source of dread for
all others (4.11.32).
4.   Illusion: By the manifestation of anger, illusion becomes stronger and this leads
to forgetfulness of Krsna (4.22.14).
5.   Hardheartedness: (/) Daksa did not prevent Sati's death (4.4.30).
(ü) Suruci indirectly asked Dhruva to change his body (4.8.13).
6.   Insensitivity: One suffers more due to harsh words of a relative than due to the
sharp arrows of an enemy (4.3.19). The heart or mind is just like an earthen pot -
once hroken cannot be repaired by any means (4.8.36).
7. Neglect: Daksa neglected his own daughter, Sati because she was the wife of Siva
(4.4.29).
8.   Fall-down: Due to accepting Siva's good qualities to be had, instead of becoming
the most exalted soul, Daksa became the most fallen (4.4.12).
UTILIZATION
'Krodha' bhakta-dvesi jane: Anger can be a great quality when directed against a
person who is envious of the Lord or His devotee (4.4.10 P). Kdma (lust) can be
utilized to satisfy Krsna, and krodha (anger) can he utilized to punish the demons
(4.25.24 P).
1.   King: It is his duty to become angry for the purpose of keeping law and order in
the state (4.11.31).
•   It is a misunderstanding that a devotee should not be angry or envious.
Dhruva became angry and went out for victory over the Yaksas (4.10.4 P).
•   The duty of king is to not tolerate the introduction of any irreligious systems
(4.19.26 P).
2.   Master: If he chastises his servant - the servant should accept this as great mercy
(4.26.22).
•   The Supreme Lord sometimes becomes angry or kills a démon. Materially this
may appear unfavourable, but spiritually it is a blissful blessing upon the
démon (4.6.46 P).
3.   Saintly persons are generally very kind to all living entities, but not unhappy
when a serpent or scorpion is killed (4.14.31 P).
•   The sages became angry upon seeing the atrocities of King Vena. They
thought to pacifying him at first, but if unsuccessful they were ready to burn
him to ashes (4.14.11-13).
•   When there is mischief made by others, a devotee should not forget to become
angry, at least for the time being, in order to drive away the miscreants
(4.11.31 P).
LESSONS FOR PERSONAL APPLICATION
When one is angry with others...
Proactive Measures
1.   One shouldn't find fault with others. If someone has a little good quality, that
should be magnified greatly (4.4.12 P).
2. A devotee doesn't find fault with the behaviour of the Lord in any circumstance
(4.6.46 P).
8. Anger
3.   If one treats others with non-enmity, then no one will become his enemy
(4.11.32).
4. A person situated in the mode of goodness can practice tolerance (4.21.33 P).
5. Not only should we not insult Vaisnavas, but we should not insult anyone
unnecessarily (4.9.23 P).
6. T o make tangible advancement in spiritual consciousness three things are to be
avoided - lust, anger and the mode of passión (4.2.19 P).
7.   By constantly hearing about devotional service, one can check the force of anger
(4.11.31).
8. Anger must be controlled for it is the foremost enemy on the path of spiritual
reaíization (4.11.31).
9. Pacify anger completely by seeking the essence of knowledge from all places, just
as a bumblebee coUects honey from each and every flower (4.18.2).
Responsive Measures
1.   Indra and Prthu were envious and angry with each other, but they adjusted
themselves. I n Krsna conscious such rivalry, competition and envy can be
adjusted without difficulty (4.20.18 P).
2.   Instead of being envious of a more qualified man, one should be joUy to receive
him (4.8.34 P).
3.   It is said that forgiveness is the beauty of a tapasvi, or saintly person (4.6.48 P).
4.   It is said that forgiveness is a quality of those who are advancing in spiritual
knowledge (4.20.3 P).
5. One who is both devoted and highly advanced in intelligence does not take action
against the soul or the body. If there is any discrepancy, he forgives (4.20.3 P).
6.   The Lord is very satisfied with a devotee who greets other people with tolerance,
mercy, friendship and equality (4.11.13 P).
7. A Vaisnava is personally tolerant for the benefit of others (4.6.48 P).
8.   One should tolerate reversals instead of becoming agitated (4.19.34 P).
When others become angry with us...
Proactive Measures
1.   Our behaviour should be such that no one become angry and thereby commit a
wrong to individuals, families or society (4.11.34 P).
x2í5?-!í^tfax2^2;fa-Í.^
Responsive Measures
1.    Be always willing to do good to others, even one who curses us (4.27.23 P).
2.    One should not visit the home of even a relative or a friend, if he is disturbed in
mind and looks upon the guest with raised eyebrows and angry eyes (4.3.18).
3. A n angry person can be pacified by good logic (4.30.46 P).
4.    In tolerance King Prthu was like the earth. Although the earth is always trampled
upon hy men and animals, it still maintains them (4.16.7 P).
.
CASE STUDIES
Recipient   Instigator   Circumstance              Response                                   f Reference
c-          Daksa      Cursed and insulted       Tolerated                                     4.2.20
Siva
Sati         Siva      Was dissuaded from        Upset. She goes                               4.4.2-3
going to her father s     anyway
house
Sati        Daksa      Was neglected and         Condemned Daksa,                                4.4
ner nusnanu insuiteu      01   0. *x 01 0. 01   11 r ji   yi *^ 01
ueienueu oiva, anu
gave up ner uouy                             a 0 1A 1 q
Dhruva       Suruci     Spoken to harshly         Went to mother                               4.ö.10-13
crying and later left
the palace
Dhruva       Yaksas     They killed his           Attacked the Yaksas.                          4.11.7 ^
brother, Uttama           Finally gave up his
excessive anger when
Manu cautioned him
Sages       Vena       Performed atrocities      Tried to pacify Vena;                       4.14.11-13;
and insulted the sages    burnt him to ashes                            4.14.30
Prthu       Earth      She stopped               Chastised her and                              4.17
producing necessities     milked the necessities
Prthu       Indra      Stole sacrificial horse   Ready to kill but                              4.19
and created pásandis      stopped by priest
Nárada        Jará      She cursed him            Helped Jará to find                          4.27.23
shelter
Pracetás      Trees      Excessive growth          Emit fire angrily                            4.30.45
MáBMmmximMM^MMm
C    I
XiaN3ddV
1 . Character       Portrayals
Lord Siva        259
Sati    260
Daksa      261
Dhruva Mahárája              262
Pfthu Mahárája          264
Nárada Muni            264
Pracetás      265
2. Krsna's Names            266
3. Vaisnava Qualities                 272
4 . Analogies        275
I. ( haracter Portrayals
1 . CHARACTER PORTRAYALS
What brings a narration to life is the personalities who are portrayed in it. Generally
many readers choose their role models or heroes from the narrations they hear. In the
pages of Srimad-Bhagavatam, which is glorified as rasam dlayarh, the scripture which
provides a rasa relished even by liberated personalities, we find personalities of
various facets. As students of this great literature and to nourish our spiritual lives,
many lessons can be learnt from understanding these personalities and their qualities.
The following is a compilation to aid the reader's contemplation on such characters,
so that he can learn lessons to apply in devotional life, making it progressive.
L O R D SIVA
•    Auspicious: Siva means "all auspicious" (4.4.14, 4.2.1 P).
•    Sankarácárya: Taught Máyáváda philosophy in Kali-yuga as Sahkarácárya to
eradicate Buddhism (4.2.28 P, 4.24.17 P).
Appearance
•   Form: Like a mystic yogi with dark matted hair, body covered in ashes and
practising austerity. (4.6.36)
•   Blue throat: Due to drinking poison. (4.3.12 P)
•   Vehicle and Instrument: BuU-carrier (Nándi) and damaru respectively. (4.1.24)
•   Daksa's perception and the reality (4.2.14-15) - See the table in page 35-36.
Relationship with Lord Visnu
•   Vaisnavánám yathá sambhuh: Greatest of all Vaisnavas (4.2.2 P, 4.4.22 P).
•   Same as H i m : Like yoghurt is not different from milk (4.6.42 P). He is almost on an
equal levél to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, possessing 84% of His qualities
(4.1.15 P).
•   Yet not same: Considering Lord Siva and Lord Visnu to be on the same levél, is an
atheistic idea (4.4.14 P)
•   His auspicious position is realized if one takes to the worship of Visnu (4.4.14 P)
•   He is pleased with those who surrender to Lord Vásudeva (4.24.28)
•   He wishes to see the Lord's personal form (4.24.44).
Merciful - to those in tamo-guna
•   Elevates: By taking his shelter, those -who are in bodily conception will gradually
understand that they are not the material body but are spirit soul (4.4.14 P). He
raises those in the mode of ignorance to spirituality (4.2.14-15 P).
•    Gunávatára: As one of "the Lords of this universe," his role is to take charge of the
mode of ignorance (4.1.30 P).
•    Bhútanátha (or Bhüta-rát or Bhüta-patim): The worshipable deity of the dull-headed
ghosts. He takes charge of reforming such living entities, becoming their spiritual
master. He gives shelter to those who have no other shelter (nirapatrapa) (4.2.8 P,
4.5.4, 4.2.2 P, 4.2.32).
•    Well-wisher: The greatest of all thinkers. He is always thinking of how to deliver
the demons, thus he incarnated as Advaita Acárya (4.6.39 P).
•    Like a father to all in wishing for their welfare and chastising them only for their
own benefit (4.7.2 P)
Character
•   Withdrawn from materialistic persons; he was happy not to receive a share in
Daksa's sacrifice by which he would have to eat with the demigods. (4.2.18 V)
•    Silent and Tolerant to Daksa's curse. Although capable, he didn't counter curse.
(4.2.20 P)
•   Morose and disappointed at the chaos caused in Daksa's sacrifice, seeing their
immaturity. (4.2.33 P)
•    Hurt by Daksa's harsh words, showing his sensitivity to material emotions despite
being liberated. (4.3.15)
•    Meditating always on Vásudeva, sattvam visuddham vasudeva-sabditam (4.3.23)
•    Anger: At the time of devastation, emanates fire from his mouth and destroying
everything (4.30.45). As tri-pura-há, he destroys the worlds (4.17.13).
•    Renounced: He does not even construct a house for his residence, but lives
underneath a tree (4.2.1 P). He is not attracted by material enjoyment such as the
hype to attend Daksa's sacrifice, as evinced by his wife (4.3.9, 11 P).
•    Inspiring: Spoke the Rudra-gita to the Pracetás (4.24.27-79). By his moment's
association, Pracetás obtained the Lord's audience (4.30.38).
•    Qualities: Refer to the table in 'Vaisnava Qualities' in Appendix (Page 274).
SATÍ                                      9Kk
Sati's character is revealed in her dealings with her husband. Lord Siva, in 4.3 and with
her father, Daksa, in 4.4. Although a chaste and obedient wife, she became distraught by
the on-going hatred and bickering between her father and husband.
MMMMMPMÍMMPM
•      Dáksáyani: She was Daksa's favourite daughter, because of her good qualities
(4.3.20). Therefore her name is also Dáksáyani.
•      Beautiful: Siva referred to her as being beautiful-eyed (subhru) and thin-waisted {su-
madhyame). (4.3.20, 22 V ) .
•      Hankering: She was well aware of the dissention and differences between her father
and her husband, one being very passionate and the other being very renounced. She
would often hanker after the material enjoyments of her father and Siva would have
to tolerate this (4.3.11 P).
•      Attachment: She tried to convince Siva to come to Daksa's sacrifice, but he did not
agree despite her many arguments (4.3.8-14). Finally she disobeyed his order.
•      Ashamed: Simply hearing her name, Dáksáyani, she would become ashamed of her
connection with her father (4.4.23).
•       Indecisive: She was anxious about disobeying her husband's order not to go to
Daksa's sacrifice. Thus she moved in and out of the room indecisively (4.4.1)
•       Chaste: She had all good qualities and faithfuUy served her husband (4.1.65). As a
chaste wife, she established the supremacy of her husband right in front of Daksa.
(4.4.16)
•       Bold: She personally selected Siva as her husband, although her father was not at all
in agreement (4.1.66 P).
•       Fearless: She moved very quickly and without fear (gata-vyatháh) (4.4.4).
•       Command: Siva's followers, such as the ghosts accompanied her to the sacrifice but
they were under her command (4.4.10).
•       Anger: In utter shame and anger toward her father, she gave up her own life right
before his eyes (4.4.27).
DAKSA
Daksa's character is extensively revealed in Chapters 2-7 of the Fourth Canto. He is one
of Brahmá's sons meant for creating progeny in the still infantile universe (4.1.11). But his
character is somewhat unrefined. He first offends Lord Siva and then silently watches
while his own daughter commits suicide (4.4.30). Srila Prahhupáda comments that Daksa
was "the incarnation of all offences" and "the embodiment of envy." (4.4.23 P)
Life
•      Marriage: He married Sváyambhuva Manu's daughter, Prasüti and had sixteen
daughters, one of whom (Sati) married Lord Siva (4.1.49)
•     Prajápati: He was appointed the chief Prajápati by Brahmá, but this only made him
more proud. (4.3.2)
mmmm^mmmtmm
•    Goat head: By the grace of Lord Siva, Daksa came back to consciousness again with
the head of a goat (4.7.9).
Qualities
•   Expert: His name suggests that he was expert in all material activities (4.2.19 P).
•   Nandisvara describes (out of anger) Daksa as pretentious, unintelligent, addicted to
sex, attached to superficial rituals and unaware of the goal of life (4.2.21-23).
Character
•   Tactful: Tried to win the audience over by proposing his position to be more
mannerly (4.2.9).
•   Anger: Criticized Lord Siva and also his father Brahmá (4.2.16). Then he cursed
Lord Siva and abruptly left the assembly (4.2.19).
•   Obsessed: With performing sacrifices, while neglectful of the Lord's devotees.
(4.3.3 P)
•   Pride: Discredited his good qualities of education, austerity, wealth, beauty, youth
and heritage (4.3.17)
•    Materialistic: Unabie to comprehend spiritual opulences such as those of Lord Siva.
(4.4.21)
DHRUVA MAHÁRÁJA
Dhruva, when he was a child of 5 years, demonstrated an intense determination to meet
with the Supreme Lord. He was a courageous spirited ksatriya boy in the royal family of
King Uttánapáda. Through his interaction with Nárada Muni, he gave up his childish
desires for material opulence and became a pure devotee of the Lord.
Background
•   Paternal: Son of Uttánapáda and grandson of Sváyambhuva Manu (4.8.8 P).
•   Maternal: Uttánapáda had two queens, named Suníti and Suruci. Suruci was much
more dear to the King, but Dhruva was the son of Suníti (4.8.8).
•   Marital: Dhruva + Bhrami —* Kalpa and Vatsara; Dhruva + Ilá —> Utkala and a
daughter (4.10.1-2).
•   Future: Growing up he became a great king and ruled the earth planet for 36,000
years in Satya-yuga.
Ksatriya Spirit
•    Anger: Like a snake, when rebuked by his stepmother, ran to his mother (4.8.15).
•    Intolerance: To even a slight infringement on his ksatriya prestige (4.8.26-27)
1. Character Portrayals
•    Honest and pragmatic: Told Narada that instructions are valuable but can't follow
them (4.8.35-36).
•    Direct: Disclosed his desire for obtaining a kingdom greater than any previously
achieved. (4.8.37)
•     Revengeful: Didn't forgive his stepmother for her actions (4.9.29) and he fought
vigilantly to avenge his brother's murder by the Yaksas (4.11.6 P).
Lamentation
•    Regret: Had a deep appreciation for the gift of devotional service and thus he
became ashamed of his previous material desires with which he approached the
Lord. (4.9.30-35)
Kingly Qualities
•    Famous: The citizens were happy to have him as the new king. (4.9.65)
•    Weapon: He carried a special arrow made by Lord Narayana (4.11.1)
•    Dutiful: Avenge brother's murder (4.10.4)
•    Godly qualities: Respectful to devotees; he protected religious priuciples and was
always kind to poor, innocent persons (4.12.12)
Devotional Qualities
•    Disciplined: He rigidly followed his spiritual master's orders (4.8.62, 4.8.71 P).
•    Attentive: Worshipped the Lord with great care and attention (4.8.71). He
performed great austerities, like an accomplished yogi (4.8.72-80).
•    Empowered: Lord gave him the ability to offer prayers by touching His conch to his
forehead (4.9.4).
•    Love: When the Lord appeared, he offered dandavat, as if kissing the Lord's feet,
embracing Him and drinking Him with his eyes (4.9.3).
•    Realized: Easily distinguished between his current consciousness (enlivened senses)
and that previously (like a dead man) (4.9.6).
•     Submissive: Followed his grandfather's orders to give up his unnecessary anger
toward the Yaksas (4.12.1).
•     Intelligent and thoughtful: Although Kuvera offered him any benediction he simply
asked for unflinching faith and remembrance of Lord (4.12.8).
•     Dutiful: Even before boarding his Vaikuntha airplane, he performed his daily
spiritual duties and sacred bath (4.12.28).
•    Gratitude: Toward his patha-pradarsaka-guru, his mother (4.12.32).
mmm:mm:mmmm
PRTHU MAHÁRÁJA
King Prthu is considered the first ruler of planet earth (4.13.20, 4.15.4). He was a partial
incarnation {saktyávesa-avatára) of the Supreme Lord and he appeared along with his
wife Arci, an incarnation of Laksmi-devI, in the unusual fashion of churning his
predecessor's body, King Vena (4.15.1-3). 4.15-23 cover his activities.
Appearance
•    Looked like the moon among stars in the assembly of his citizens (4.21.14).
•    More aspects of his beauty - refer 4.21.16-20.
Noble Character
•    Humility: From his very birth he rejected any glorification of himself (4.15.25).
•    Gratitude: He showed his deep love and gratitude for the saintly persons - How can
I repay such great souls as you (the Four Kumáras) (4.22.47).
A Powerful Leader
•   Speech: He was a great public speaker. His words were charismatic, clear,
meaningful and for the upliftment of everyone (4.21.20).
•   Power: Able to convince and overpower the earth to release grains (4.17-18).
•   Embodied the demigods in various aspects of his perfection as a king (4.16.6-13).
Role Mode!
•   Hospitality: Exemplary in receiving the Four Kumáras (4.22.47).
•   Dutiful: Acted only to please the Ahsolute Truth and according to duty (4.22.50).
•   Perfect devotee and his aim was to please the citizens (4.22.52).
•   Spread brahminical culture (4.21.52).
T H E PRACETÁS
The Pracetás are the ten sons of King Prácínabarhisat and Satadruti, all of whom were
endowed with good behaviour and religiosity (4.24.13). They worshipped Lord Krsna in
the depths of the western ocean for 10,000 years, with a prayer given to them by Lord
Siva (the Rudra-gita). After the Lord appeared to them they married Márisá, the daughter
of the trees.
•   Pious and well-behaved (sddhavah).
•   Submissive: Accepted their father's orders to create progeny with great faith and
surrender on their heads (4.24.19).
•   Dear to Siva as they are devotees of the Supreme Lord (4.24.30).
•   Austerities: They performed intense austerities under water (4.30.4).
•    Anger: They showed great anger in burning all the trees that had taken over the
earth (4.30.44-45).
•    United and cooperative: They showed great unity among one another. This is one
of the reasons the Lord became so pleased with them (4.30.8).
NÁRADA M U N I
Nárada, like elsewhere in the Bhagavatam, has a major presence in the Fourth Canto. He
is the greatest messenger of bhakti and travels the universe for the welfare of all, just like
the sun (4.8.38). He instructs Dhruva, Prácínabarhi and the Pracetás in bhakti.
Appearance
•    Viná: a musical instrument he carries (4.8.38)
•    Naisthika-brahmacárí: A life-long celibate, remains ever youthful (4.27.21)
•    Spiritual body: Unaffected by birth, death, old age and disease (4.27.22 P)
Present throughout the universe
Travels everywhere: both in the material and spiritual world (4.12.34 P) and can do
so without any kind of machinery (4.22.48 P).
•   Gosthyánandí: travels only for the purpose preaching (4.30.37 P).
•   Trikála-jna: knows about past, present and future. Heard of Dhruva's austerities
and Sati's suicide before anyone else (4.5.1 P, 4.8.25 P).
•   Kailása: he is seen hearing from Lord Siva about bhakti (4.6.37).
As Guru
•   Tests the disciple: He first told Dhruva that his attempt to see the Supreme Lord is
not appropriate for a young boy (4.8.30-32).
•    Expert Preacher: He only teaches devotional service, but convinces different people
in different ways. For King Prácínabarhisat he was able to give an extensive analogy
to suit his intelligence (4.26-28).
•    Challenges the disciple with questions -
o To Pracinabarhi: "What do you achieve by your fruitive activities?" (4.25.5).
o To Dhruva: " Y o u are just a boy. Why attached to your honour?" (4.8.27).
•    Glorifies his disciple - sings about Dhruva's glories in the sacrificial aréna of the
Pracetás (4.12.41-43).
Great Devotee
Compassion: for King Prácínabarhisat, Nárada visited him and instructed him in
spiritual life (4.25.3).
Absorbed: always, in thoughts of Krsna (4.33.8).
N.^^^^^mmmm:mjMfmmmímí
2 . KRSNA'S NAMES
X
'§:r.^z%f
The Supreme Lord is also known as Ananta, or one who is unlimited in all respects
(4.30.31). In generál, a name is one of the prominent identities for a person.
However, the Lord, being unlimited, has unlimited names glorying H i s unlimited
forms, qualities, pastimes and opulences. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam we come across
numerous names of the Lord, with which His devotees address H i m . Each of these
addresses have various deep meanings and emotions invested in them by those
devotees, based on the type of rasa or relationship they relish with the Lord. Further,
the particular situation they are undergoing, a particular quality of the Lord
exhibited in that situation, and other factors enhance its flavor. These names are a
remediai measure for the nescience of a conditioned soul, when meditated upon
deeply. As Nárada Muni says in SB 1.5.11, námány anantasya, the Lord's holy names
are a wonderful means to bring about remembrance of the Lord for a devotee. The
following is a list of the Lord's names taken from the verses of the Fourth Canto,
duly categorized.
Note: Somé names will fali into more than one of category. Although somé of these
names appear repeatedly, only one instance of the name is taken.
Names that highiight the Lord's Persona! Attributes
1    4.9.9     abja-ndbha             Lord who has a lotus navel
2    4.7.32    acyuta                 Infallible
3    4.7.36    adhisa                 Supreme controller
4    4.21.36   adhisvaram             Supreme master
5    4.3.23     adhoksajah            Transcendental, Supreme Personality
6    4.9.13     aja                   Unborn
7    4.31.28    ajita                 Unconquerable
8    4.31.20    aksarah               Infallible
9    4.9.14     ananta                The unlimited being Sesa
10   4.24.36    aniruddha             Lord Aniruddha in catur-vyüha
mmmmmmmmmmmmm
2. Krsna's Names
11      4.6.40         arhattamah                      Vamanadeva
12      4.1.28         bhagavan                        Great personality, master of all opulence
13      4.1.58         bhagavanta                      Supreme Personality of Godhead
14      4.1.59         bhagavatah                      Supreme Personality of Godhead
15      4.10.30        sdrnga-dhanvá                   Bearer of the how called Sdrnga
16      4.1.33         dattah                          T,ord Oattatreva
17      4 8 75         Li't'l/Hrrí                     Snnrpmp T orn
18      4.17.30        rlh/Ttr/1                       Siinreme T ord
cJ L l LJ J. V^lllV^ J—íWJ. U-
19      4.8.29         iSVÜTU                          Ultimate Controller
20      4.15.9         ^ddd'hhytdh                     Lord Visnu, who carries a club
*JW\.^\/l^   \0 t f 1 t/Utftf
21      4.23.12        saddsraia                       Krsna, the elder brother of Gada
22      4.9.26         garuda-dhvajah                  Lord Visnu, whose flag bears the Garuda emblem
23      4.29.82        govinda                         Supreme Personality of pleasure
24      4.8.44         gurum                           Supreme Spiritual Master, Krsna.
1   C
4./.4ö         hrsikese                        Master of the senses
Íj
26      4.1.59         hari                            T       J   T T
Lord Hari
A
11          Qi   Í Z
jagat-dtmanah                   The soul of the universe
4.31.16
1o      4.30.21        jana-ardanam                    Une who takes away ali the disadvantages or the
ClC V L J L t C
29      4.1.59         krsnau                          The two Krsnas (Krsna and Arjuna)
30      4.12.21        madhu-dvisah                    The enemy of Madhu)
31      4.7.46         mahd-sükarah                    The great Boar incarnation
32      4.12.27        maulind                         Head of all living entities
33      4.9.36         mukunda                         Giver of liberation
34      4.26.24        mura-ripoh                      The enemy of Mura
35      4.1.49         nara-ndrdyanau                  Both Nara and Narayana
36      4.6.3          ndrdyanah                       Narayana
37      4.9.8          ndtha                           Lord
38      4.31.18        para-ísam                       Transcendental controller
39      4.7.50         páram                           Supreme
40      4.17.29        parasmai purusáya               Supreme Personality of Godhead
41      4.7.38         prabho                          Lord
42      4.24.35        pradyumndya                     Lord Pradyumna in the catur-vyüha
43          4 9 14      J/14-rflUií                      i^^nj n
u pr ipcti ni ipc 1P pc ir ac uo ini
44          4   TO T    '/x A I 'V 011/101 1 011/1 011/1/1 W 1 1 *X *-vx ű 1
pUTufn-fUflufH                     o u p r c r n e J-,OrQ
4^1         4   11 17   -ftlJ/^IJ C 01 /^ C 01 101 01 hl   Verest j e w e i a m o n g m e n
pUTUSu-TSuOnUrl
46          4 20 27     iii/tfu ^/j ~i,éft/j'yyi/yiryj     R p Q í " íJTTiCinCT m p n
Uhti ylüU híhhChrrl'Chfrh
47          4.22.63     rdmah                            Lord Rámacandra
48          4.9.1       sahasra-sirsa                    The Lord with thousands of heads
49          4.24.42     sdnkhya-yoga-                    Master of the priuciples of sankhya-yoga
isvardya
O \J        4 50 26                                       1—liíTriliT' rr 1 c x f i r 1 fiíH 1 /"\t*/H
J T l l g l l i y g H J l l i l C U . J-íOlti
O       1   491         1JV1J r}^011/1010                1 /-\t"/H       \>7rícxcíi 1 i ^ t " ! c          0\ 0 0^ 11 tx   0\ 001 rxx 0\ tx
j_itjiLi^ w i l u a c             acLioiia        aic      uiieoiiiixioii
4 8 57      11-f-t 011/101 01 cl0\lr>/ll0l   j_,oru w n o               ií> aiways            uescriDeu            in c n o i c e poeiry
ST          4 12 21     n-fl 011/1/101 rr/i'\t0i         j-íOru V i s n u , w n o is o r e x c e u e n t r e n o w n
u      iiunTu-guyu
54          4 20 1      l/UlKltflhrlUrh                  T^nP
1 I I C iT- iorH    r\T Á
U i U KJí V/ taal iJ lSA- U
nnl lTLnl ti ia
55          4.3.23      vdsudevah                        Vásudeva
56          4.7.43      vibhüman                         The Supreme Almighty Great
C7          4   14      visnuh                           The Supreme Lord
j    /
58          4.22.22     yoga-Uvara                       Lord of all mystic power
Names that relate the Lord with Material Nature
1       4.9.15      adhimakhah           Enjoyer of the results of all sacrifices
2       4.24.35     antakdya             The master of disintegration
3       4.24.35     antah-dtmane                     The Supersoul in everyone's heart
4       4.1.15      dtma                             The Supersoul
5       4.7.50      átma-Uvarah                      The Supersoul
6_^^^^ 4.1.6        bhagavdn yajusdm                 The Lord of all sacrifices
7_ 4.7.37           bhüman                           Possessor of the universe
8      4.14.19      bhüta-bhávanah                   Originál cause of the cosmic manifestation
9           4.15.3      bhuvana-pdlinl                   Maintainer of the world
10          4.8.76      brahma                           The Supreme Personality of Godhead
11          4.13.35     sipi-vistdya                     The Lord, who is situated in the sacrificial fire
12          4.17.35     dhará-dharah                     The protector of the planet earth
13          4.14.20     isvara-isvare                    The controller of the controllers
14          4.9.34      jagat-dtmdnam                    The soul of the universe
15          4.20.28     jagat-ísa                        Lord of the universe
yÍ <>*Vt5*,j^**\c3*-«^^^t''-y*»\t;3".->'
Í H l í ' ^ Í ' Í S Í i f f ' ^ Í 'é*^r3'z/éé-
^^^mgHII
16        4.1.20                 11* J£ tA-h íOtZt* / lAi h                     Master of the universe
17        4.22.55                Íí2(^íif-J. ± M.\0 9-0 9-1 10 ±.     9-/ ÍM. 1^0   ^0M, 10 H %/ 1-01.
18        4. Z22Z . 21
x         Z l          ntrgune                                        1 IIC JQiir\t*pmp
nrlxű   U U I C I I I C 5 \x7nr\  ic np^ronri
W l l U lo UCyUilU. t"nP
LilC lTníií"Pt*ií3l       tnoHpQ
i i d L C l i d l lllUUt-O
1Q        Z    Q    S            ll 01 Hf 01 01 '^10101 01                  i ne oupreme juui
A                      yara-airna
x . Z3xA
.fi 0110 0110101 01 Li 0110101 0- 01 r\ 101 1 rx íx ^ 111-\ 1" txx r\í»t*i"í>í^1-
.      J10
o                                                     1 IIC J U U l C l l l C p C l i C C L
puVufftu-rtUrflSuyu
Z l       A 3A xq                Vx 10 01 1 01 1 0- 1 t 01 4^ 01 1/1            Ti ' IIC
np C   o nI lTLi "l/Uo ll i1Cprc
P íU                      l O Ur\T  o l llli^rincr
i ctll               pnt"it"ipc
l V l l l g CllLlLlCo
x . Z x . /       J    pruju-tSVuTun
4 11 30                iiY/if'Mdh-nf'pyidyii                  nrhp Siinersniil
X 1Í\0 !_/L4 L7CZ 0V./U1
X   q     X. ± 1 . JV/
A 3 A 10               L/f   Hh
pürnáyu      yCtK.         (/H-rrtíAilf' 1 Ix ű c n tx»"0 txx íi i"/xrYX tx 1 o f - ö
^.z^.     Jo                                                   1 ne supreme compiete
3A
Z l
Z 8 XQ                 ./x« M 101 M 0. 01 10 1 9 0110 0110101
íviaSLer 0 1 au uving ennnes
X   c     A    3A           11
purusa-tsvarant
0 0110 Í09 01 JI0 0 0110 010 9 01     ' 1 Ix Ű TXX iX Ct-Z*»* 0~\r 1 VX ••OÍTV'X ^1/xtx
Z j       ^ . Z x .     J J
sanfiarsanaya                                  1 ne master 0 1 integration
X 0
4. /.49                sarva-átmá                                     The Supersoul of all living entities
XX        A X ZQ                 sarva-bhága-bhuk                                1 Ix Ű ű VX 1 011 Tű •* /Xr §- rX ű Í-ŰC 1 1 1                    /X 1" *X 1 1 C *X 0-11* 1 r   t   01 zxc
Z /
4.
A /.47                                                                 11 ne   enjoyer     or tne resuits or an sacriiices
t-C yXI X 1 /Xr /X 1 1 1 1 X TI XX fi ű tx ^ t ^ X Ű c
2ö
X o          X CZ
sarva-bhüta-                                       Ix ű ^ 1 X
4./.54                                                                 1 ne oupersoui 0 1 au iiving eniuies
/ff 10101011010110101
29        4 19 3                 oL*f   l/C*    HJtftil
TO        4 9? T8                c /ff 01 c /rf                TVip ^nnreme T orn ann TTi'^ nifferenf enerpie*;
DU
TI        4 116                  32        4 24 34                ^Hf  U jf L^ohiHAfl
Clf/I-YlíPI ^P                                 T h e JL 1 1 ^ 0 U. LyX l ^ l l l L ' 111 U - l l l l l X d L l W l l
30        X.Z.X. J X
qq
J J       1.7.Ij
Z    Q 1 C              ^101   01011010 0110
íviaster oi tne tnree moues
J x       xZ. O
4.
3J                  11101101 011-1010101                          T^np \nfOPrcmil nr rrip p n T i r p                                   nnívprcp
1 IIC J U p C i o U U l U l LlIC C I l L l i C UliiVClOC
35        Z 7 38                  i ( -7 44 f                T^np Q n n p r c m i l c\\ d l ! livincT p n t " i t " i p c
J j       X.   /.     J ö                                                       1 IIC J U p C l O U U l U l d l l l l V l l I g CiititiCo
J34
D       Z
x . Z20
U . 32
J Z
1 l 4 d l Z T 0-1101/1                        nTnp
1 IIC coCCi
ppr OU rl ttllC
" n p \WllUlC
J i 7 n o l p iUlllVCIoC
inívprcp
VtSVu-uTK
qx        Z
x . Z2Z
x . 35
J J
1 9101 9 01 '/x 10 01 Íx/X 01 1/1 01 ^ 1 01   T1 nIIC
p                           n p nPTtplotompnr
m d c f " p r oUrl TtlIC
llIdOtCI                                         h p iinívprcp
U.CVCIUpiIICIlt oUri TLllC UlilVCioC
j     /                           VlSVu-pTuuOanaya
J ö       Z1 4
x . l . x              yu]tici                                        T orn          ir d i f i d
i_qQ        Z 7 qq                  0 1 01 1101 01 01 -§"1/101 01 101             ' 1 Ix Ű 1 /-\t*/X r\T CO/•*%"! T I Of»
x . / . J J
J7                                yajna-aitnan                                   1 ne Loru or sacriiice
x U       Z
X. 7
/ . 48
xö
XI/XI-lzízX l/lVl 011 1 01101/i               T^np   t oi U
1 IIC p    r ot rCpCo trU    or i cOdClIilCC
o lr U      donriop
yufnu-unuVUfT6
41        4 13 32                 vdiíid-hntih                                  T h e eniover of sacrifice
X. 11^0 ^/l 1 1         1 XfiL 1-01 1011^01 11 1^0^
42        4.7.47                  yt/ffrllA í/tllAfc
yajna-lsa                                     The Lord of sacrifice
43         4.7.25                 yajna-Uvaram                                  The master of ali sacrifice
44         4.7.46                 yajna-kratuh                                  The form of sacrifice
45         4.25.29                yajna-pumsá                                   The enjoyer of all sacrifices
46         4.12.33                yajna-purusah                                 The enjoyer of all sacrifices
47         4.7.41                 yajniyam                                      The protector of the sacrifice
Qualifiers that hring out the character of the Lord
1     4.30.28   abhadra-randhana        Killer of all inauspiciousness                    .
2     4.8.20    abhivandyam             Worshipable Lord
3     4.8.46    ásrayanam               Shelter of the surrendered
4     4.7.42    ádyah                   Originál Lord
5     4.24.42   akuntha-medhase         One whose activity is never checked
6     4.24.58   anagha-anghreh          His lotus feet destroy all inauspiciousness
7     4.7.32    ánanda-karam            Cause of pleasure
8     4.30.43   anapavarga-viryah       His prowess is never defeated
9     4.9.8     árta-bandho             Friend of the distressed                          i
^4.7.24    arvák-vrttayah          Beyond the mentái activities
11    4.31.13   átma-dah                Can give us our originál identity
12    4.6.46    dtmani                  The Supreme
13    4.7.26    dtma-tantrah            Self-sufficient                                   ,
14    4.8.22    bhrtya-vatsalam         Very kind to His devotees
15    4.12.6    bhava-cchidah           Immediately cuts the chain of the repetition of
birth and death
16    4.7.26    bhavdn                  Your Lordship
17    4.8.59    bhdva-vardhanah         Increases the ecstasy of the devotee
18    4.8.46    saranyam                Worthy to surrender
19    4.7.26    citmdtram               Completely spiritual
20    4.7.40    srita-sattvdya          The shelter of the quality of goodness
21    4.7.26    suddham                 Pure
22    4.30.42   suddhdya                Never contaminated by sinful activities
23    4.17.31   dharma-parah             Strictly follows religious priuciples
24    4.7.26    ekam                     One without a second
25    4.29.55   hamsa-saranam           The shelter of the liberated souls
26    4.30.24   hari-medhase            His intelligence works for the deliverance of
1                                           the conditioned soul
27    4.24.36   indriya-dtmane          The director of the senses
28    4.30.2    kaivalya-ndtha          The bestower of liberation
29    4.30.25   kamala-íksana            Eyes are exactly like lotus petals
30    4.30.25   kamala-mdline            Always decorated with a lotus garland
A " l * * A T f * A T H f # '
31    4.30.25   kamala-nábhdya         From his abdomen the originál lotus sprouted
32    4.30.25   kamala-pdddya          His feet are as beautiful and fragrant as lotus
33    4.24.42   kdrana-dtmane          The supreme cause of all causes
34    4.30.22   klesa-vindsandya       Destroys material distress
35    4.9.29    mukti-pateh            Giver of liberation
36    4.8.46    nrmnam                 Transcendentally pleasing in all respects
37    4.9.15    nitya mukta            Eternally liberated
38    4.20.20   padma-paldsa-aksah     Eyes are like the petals of a lotus flower
39    4.8.23    padma-paldsa-locandt The lotus-eyed Lord
40    4.24.34   pankaja-ndbhdya        From whose navel the lotus flower emanates
41    4.1.56    parasmai               The Supreme
42    4.30.24   prabhave               Increases the influence
43    4.7.31    pranata-dtma bandhuh Friend of surrendered soul
44    4.7.37    pratyak-drastd         Inner witness
45    4.3.23    pumdn                  The Supreme Person
46    4.6.48    puskara-ndbha          Lord Visnu, who has a lotus navel
47    4.7.26    purusatvam             Overseer
48    4.1.56    purusdya               The Supreme Person
49    4.8.51    sa-anurdga-            Looks toward        the   devotees   with    great
avalokanam             affection
5Ö'   4.30.26   sdksine                The supreme witness
51    4.30.42   samdya                 Equal to everyone
52    4.7.50    svayam-drk             Self-sufficient
53    4.24.14   tapas-patim            Master of all austerity
54    4.7.46    trayi-gátra            Personified Vedic knowledge
55    4.24.38   trayydh pataye         Master of three Yedas
56    4.7.50    upadrastd              The witness
57    4.7.29    vara-da                Supreme benef actor
58    4.8.51    vara-da-rsabham        Greatest bestower of benedictions.
59    4.7.38    vatsala                Favourable Lord
60    4.17.36   vira-yasah-karebhyah   Brings renown to heroes themselves
61    4.30.24   visuddha-sattvdya      His existence is free from material influence
3 . VAISNAVA QUALITIES
Everyone likes to look good although it is said, "Looks deceive." But what we look
like in the eyes of the Supreme Lord is what really matters. Devotees who are
decorated with the beautiful ornaments of Vaisnava qualities are the ones who look
good in the eyes of Krsna. Sri Caitauya Mahaprabhu became pleased with Sanátana
Gosvámí just by seeing his Vaisnava qualities and ettiquette - "maryadd-pdlana haya
sddhura bhüsana" {CC Antya 4.130). Contemplating on the various Vaisnava
qualities in Canto Four, exhibited by different personalities under various
circumstances, can help nourish our consciousness to become beautiful in the eyes of
Krsna.
LORD SIVA
1       andgase              Faultless (4.1.66)
2       silavatdrh srestha   The best among the gentle (4.2.1)
3       cardcara gurum       Spiritual master of entire world (4.2.2)
4       dtma-drdmam          Self-satisfied (4.2.2)
5       nirvairam            Without enmity (4.2.2)
6       sdnta-vigraham       Having a peaceful personality (4.2.2)
7       dtma-drdmam          Satisfied in himself (4.2.2)
8       apratidruhi          Non-envious (4.2.21)
9       amartya              Immortal lord (4.3.14)
10      atisdyanah                                           — —        —
Having no rival (4.4.11)
11      priya-dtmanah        Most beloved (4.4.11)
12      mukta-vairake        Free from all enmity (4.4.11)
13      mahat-tamdh          The greatest person (4.4.12)
14      bahuli-karisnavah    Greatly magnifies even small qualities (4.4.12)
15      pavitra-kirtim       Having pure fame (4.4.14)
16      alanghya-sdsanam     Whose order is never neglected (4.4.14)
—-3Z-O7~1J:^—ZZ3Z-Z^
17         iticii/i        /x zy-M/-# M zT-1 f/5                 liTifiíx/H /~\r "X 11 l i x r i t x f T í » t x f - i l - i ö o i 4
jriiCliU        Ui     d.11   llViilg        CXlLlLlCd \^,^,liJ 1
^       1
ÍR     l/tl /I Ll 01 §-0110101   10101 01 ll 11 t 01 C 01
w u r b n i p p e u uy great sages                              anci         saints        ^T-.T-.ZO/
fnunulufiT                        fnuniyuSu
19     hhutu                                                 Pvrxpft' itx    rx'ít"i"ip í Á. ^ /l \
e x p e r t i n uattie ^ T - . J . T - /
70         c/j-yyt c/ifif/i-indT/ilf/Tyyi
oUffhoUrlVUL/l'gf      UrlUfrl                        CíVCLVP íifiH c^inl"lv (4 A T4i
z91         01 01   Vl 1 fl t 0110 0l 10*01                       \4Z
99l
Íviaster u i rne senses ^ T - . D . j j j
Lz ** 1 űfX 01 01 r T Ix Ű TT T Ix 01 1 ű UT 01 1 01 I ^
ZZ         1 11 01 1 t 0-t 011 M l/t 10 01 01 Itt/t                                                                                            X 1 \
visvu-sunraam                                         rrienu       or tne wnoie woria J I . D . J J ;
99J
Z          101 i i 01   i/t/1 011010101 / 011/1/1                i\ 9 t 01 m 011 019 1 01 r 0111 091T011*1 T0in 01 í A L— x                            1 \
lOKu-níangaiunt                                       /vuspicious ror everyone ( I . O . J J )
24         mangala                                               Most auspicious (4.6.45)
25         midhustama                                            Best of the benedictors (4.7.6)
26         anukrosa-hrdayah                                      Very kindhearted (4.24.32)
27         ndráyana-parah                                        Great devotee of Lord Narayana (4.24.32)
D H R U V A MAHÁRÁJA
mahdn                                                 Great personality (4.8.65)
2         prabhuh                                               Competent (4.8.68)                                                     _
3         duratyaydt                                            Strongly determined (4.8.82)
4         bhadra                                                Good boy (4.9.20)                                                          "
5         mdnava-uttamah                                        Best of the humán beings (4.10.21)
6         anagha                                                Sinless (4.12.2)                                                                        31
7         mahd-bhdgavatah                                       A first-class pure devotee (4.12.8)
8         mahd-matih                                            Most intelligent or thoughtful (4.12.8)
9         sila-sampannam                                        Endowed with godly qualities (4.12.12)
10        mahd-dtmd                                             Great soul (4.12.14)
11        avicala-indriyah                                      Undisturbed by sense agitation (4.12.14)
12        dyusman                                               Immortal (4.12.27)
13        urukrama-priyah                                       Very dear to the Lord (4.12.28)
14        krsna-pardyanah                                       Fully Krsna conscious (4.12.38)
15        vikhydta                                              Very famous (4.12.52)
16        visuddha                                              Very pure (4.12.52)
PRTHU MAHÁRÁJA
1        karúnak                                                  Very kind hearted (4.16.7)
2        titiksati akramam                                      ^ Tolerates offence (4.16.7)
3 sa-anurdga                                                      Affectionate (4.16.9)                                         ^
4        gambhira                                                 Grave (4.16.10)
mMmmMmmmiMfmmMmKMm
T*V5
Ayiv                                                                                                                                                                             Aw
Appendix
mmmtm:mm:mM
5     drdha-vratah          Firmly determined (4.16.16)                    j
6     satya-sandhah         Always situated in truth (4.16.16)
7     brahmanyah            A lover of the brahminical culture (4.16.16)
8    vrddha-sevakah        A servitor of the old men (4.16.16)
9    saranyah              Worthy of taking shelter (4.16.16)
10    mdna-dah              Respects everyone (4.16.16)
11    dina-vatsalah         Very kind to the poor and helpless (4.16.16)
12    snigdhah              Affectionate (4.16.17)
13    rdja-rsih             The great saintly King (4.17.5)
14    prabhu                Powerful (4.17.6)
15    dpanna-vatsala        Shelter of the surrendered (4.17.18)
16    bhüta-bhdvana         Protector of living entities (4.18.10)
17    prthu-pardkramah      Celebrated as very powerful (4.19.26)
18    acyuta-dtmakah        Krsna conscious (4.22.55)
19    saumya                Very gentle (4.22.55)
20    anubhdvah             Very great, powerful (4.23.30)
21    bhagavat-tantah       Best among the lords (4.23.30)
FOUR KUMÁRAS
1 siddha-isvardn         Masters of all mystic power (4.22.2)
1   mangala-dyandh       Personified good fortune (4.22.7)
3   dvija-sresthdh       Best of the brahmanas (4.22.12)
4   dtma-drdtnesu        Always engaged in spiritual bliss (4.22.14)
5   siddha-rüpi          Perfectly self-realized (4.22.16)
NÁRADA MUNI
1 bhagavdn               Great devotee of the Supreme Lord (4.31.8)
2 munih                  Very thoughtful (4.31.8)
3 uttama-sloke           Excellently renowned (4.31.8)
4    dvista              Absorbed (4.31.8)
KING ANGA
1 sila-nidheh            Reservoir of good characteristics (4.13.21)
2 sddhoh                 Saintly person (4.13.21)
3 brahmanyasya           Lover of brahminical culture (4.13.21)
4 mahdtmanah             Great soul (4.13.21)
Srila Sanátana Gosvámi glorifies Srimad-Bhagavatam as "mad guro man mahd
dhana," in his prayers to this supreme scripture. The duty of a teacher is to explain
the subject matter in a way that the student understands it nicely. As a universal
teacher, the Srimad-Bhagavatam teaches its students through various ways and
techniques to inspire them to understand, assimilate and apply the process of
devotional service in their lives. Using analogies is a primary tool utilized in various
episodes of this canto by various personalities - to glorify the Lord, bhakti or to
explain a subject matter. The following is a compilation of the analogies found in
Canto Four to aid the reader's appreciation and utilization of this knowledge.
Note: Subjects / objects / things marked with same colour are compared with each
other within a particular analogy. For example: Fire - Lord, friction - krpa-s'akti
A B O U T T H E LORD
The Lord's Svarüpa
1.   When an iron rod is made red-hot in fire, it is no longer iron, hut fire. Similarly,
when we make a form of the Lord - whether of wood, stone, metál, jewels, paint,
or even a form within the mind - it is a hona fide, spiritual, and transcendental
form of the Lord. (4.8.54 P)
2.   The transcendental pastimes of the Lord are like ornamental decorations on the
ears of devotees. (4.22.25)
3.   Just as a king is always accompanied by his ministers, secretaries and
commanders, Lord Visnu is always accompanied by His followers - the
demigods, great sages and saintly persons. (4.30.6 P)
In relation to material nature
4.   Just as the architect of a building exists prior to its construction, the creator (the
Lord) exists before the universal creation. (4.1.26-27 P)
5.   Fire, situated in one place, emanates its heat and illumination everywhere.
Similarly, whatever we see within the material or spiritual worlds is nothing but a
manifestation of the different energies emanating from the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. (4.7.45 P)
6.   A touchstone does not decrease in power even after creating many valuable stones
and jewels. Similarly, the Lord creates and destroys the universes many times, but
remains untouched and undiminished in power. (4.11.19 P)
7.   Just as a mechanic operates an entire machine by virtue of pressing a single
button, the Lord operates all of creation through His energies, simply by pushing
the button of His own will. (4.17.33 P)
8.   Just as a business runs hy the brain and energy of a businessman, similarly the
hrain and energy of the Lord carry on the complete manifestation of the material
and spiritual worlds. (4.24.60 P)
9.   Clouds, darkness, and light appear and disappear in the sky in succession.
Similarly the energies of rajas, tamás and sattva appear and disappear in the
Lord. (4.31.17)
The Lord's position and power
10. Electric bulbs exist in different strengths, like 1000 candles, 100 candles, etc., but
light is present in every hulh. Similarly, amongst the different expansions of the
Lord (both visnu-tattva and jiva-tattva), there are different gradations. (4.1.15 P)
11. Just as the resting place of sunshine is the sun globe, the resting place of Brahman
is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. (4.8.78 P)
12. Just as the sun is known when it rises of its own accord, the Ahsolute T r u t h may
be known when He chooses to reveal Himself. (4.11.23 P)
13. Just as a hull, prompted by a rope in its nose, is controlled by its owner, everyone
in this world is working under the Lord's control. (4.11.27)
14. Just as one has to pass through sunshine to get to the sun, one has to pass through
Brahman to get to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. (4.30.30 P)
In relation to the jíva
15. The government should always be merciful, yet employ its police force to mete
out punishment to rebellious citizens. Similarly, the Lord is always merciful, but
employs máyá to correct souls who have forgottén their relationship with H i m .
(4.11.18 P)
16. Just as the wind impartially carries different substances like dust, water, or fire,
the Lord as time impartially carries to the living entity, their own karma as
suffering or enjoyment. (4.11.20)
mBmmmmmm5mmímm:m
MMMMMíMMPMi                                                 4. Analogies
17. Just as hands and legs are parts and parcels of the whole body, all living entities
are parts and parcels of Krsna. (4.12.4 P)
18. Just as a father v^ants all of his children to become happy under his direction,
Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has the right to sec that all living
entities are happy. (4.21.27 P)
19. A fire may !>la/c in different ways according to the shape and dimension of the
firewood. Similarly, the one L o r d manifests as varieties of consciousness within
the living entities, whose bodies arise from a combination of material nature,
time, desires and occupational duties. (4.21.35)
20. A father and mother are always forgiving and well-wishers of their sons, even
when offended. Similarly, despite all our offences and defiance of the desires of the
Lord, He will give all living entities immediate relief from all hardships, if they
simply surrender unto Him. (4.28.25 P)
in relation to the devotee
21. Just as a person cannot tolerate the scorching sunshine on one's feet, although one
can tolerate it on one's head, the Lord cannot tolerate offences to His servants,
although He can tolerate offences committed towards Himself. (4.4.13 P)
22. A cow takes care of its newly horn calf by supplying it milk and giving it
protection from attack. Similarly, the L o r d causeiessly and mercifully maintains
His devotees, by giving them His own bhakti and protecting them from mattrial
desires. (4.9.17, P)
23. Just as the sky never leaves the living entities, no matter where they may wander,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead never leaves H i s devotees, even for a
second, knowing Himself to be controlled by them. (4.31.20)
24. A king may engage a joker, and in the process of joking, may even be insulted. The
king, however, enjoys these activities. Similarly, everyone worships the Supreme
Lord with great reverence and thus the Lord sometimes wants to enjoy the
chastisement of H i s devotees. (4.31.20 P)
In relation to Lord Siva
25. Yogurt is not different from the originál milk from which it was made, yet still it
is different. Similarly, in their originál position, there is no difference between Lord
Siva and Lord Visnu, yet still they are different. (4.6.42 P, Brahmá-sarhhitd 5.45)
26. Just as a criniinal department may be considered lower than an educational
department, but both are equally important to the government, and just as
Brahmá, Visnu and Siva are compared from different angles of vision, but are all
auspicious, being the expansions of the Supreme auspicious - similarly, tamo-
guna is considered lower than sattva and rajas, but in the higher sense, is also
auspicious. (4.6.43 P)
A B O U T MATERIAL NATURE
In connection to the Lord
27. Just as the air and clouds are situated in space, the cosmic manifestation is
situated in the Lord. (4.1.56)
28. Just as the sun's presence is sometimes concealed by clouds or dust, the Lord's
influence is hidden from our eyes by the wonderful activities of máyá. (4.1.57 P)
29. Fire burns differently according to the size and quality of the wood. Similarly, the
same material energy appears as either the spiritual energy or material energy for
the devotees and nondevotees, respectively. (4.9.7 P)
30. Just as water is generated by the sun and absorbed by the sun's power, and just as
the bodies of the living entities are generated from the earth and again disappear
into the earth - similarly, the cosmic manifestation arises from the Lord and
subsequently disappears in Him. (4.31.15)
31. Just as the sunshine is nondifferent from the sun, the cosmic manifestation is also
nondifferent from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. (4.31.16)
32. Just as a potter's wheel is the immediate cause of a pot, material nature is the
immediate cause of the cosmic manifestation. However, just as the real cause of
the pot is the potter himself, those who are actually advanced will find that the
originál cause of the world is Náráyana, Krsna. (4.31.17 P)
In connection to the jíva
33. Just as a dream or phantasmagoria causes forgetfulness for a man, this cosmic
manifestation, as a creation of máyá, bewilders the living entities. (4.12.15)
34. Just as a cow cannot deliver sufficient milk without being affectionate to her calf,
the earth cannot produce sufficient necessities without feeling affection for those
who are Krsna conscious. (4.18.9-10 P)
35. Just as a man who is sleeping very deeply forgets his duties, the jiva, in his
ignorant state of material existence, forgets his eternal relationship with the
Lord. (4.20.25 P)
As a Cause
36. Just as the nipples on the neck of a goat cannot be the cause of milk, similarly
prakrti is not the ultimate cause of the cosmic manifestation. (4.31.17 P)
(^;^^^^0_f^^JlJ€^^Aj
4. Analogies
A B O U T T H E JÍVA
In relation to the Lord
37. Just as a child, guided by his parents actually enjoys complete independence, the
real independence of the living entity is remaining always dependent on the
Supreme Lord. (4.9.35 P)
38. The niinute molecules of sunshine are innumerable expansions of the sun.
Similarly, the expanded living entities which come from the Supreme Lord, are
innumerable. (4.28.53 P)
39. Just as a servant may desire to start his own business and imitate his master,
leaving his master's protection, similarly the living entity starts his own business to
compete with the Lord. But to become like the Lord is not at all possible.
(4.29.27 P)
Without Krsna Consciousness...
40. Just as a poor man asks for a few broken grains of husked rice from the emperor
out of pure ignorance, although he is able to give anything he might ask, similarly a
conditioned soul asks for material name, fame, and prosperity from the
Supreme Lord, although He is giving His personal service. (4.9.35)
41. Just as a miser doesn't spend his money and remains a miset, similarly when a jiva
doesn't utilise this humán form of life especially meant for understanding
Brahman, he remains a miser throughout his life. (4.28.7 P)
42. Just as a foolish person engages in improving the condition of a city without
caring for the citizens or inhabitants, similarly a living entity who is not properly
enlightened in spiritual knowledge takes care of the external body, not knowing
that the spirit soul is the principal factor within the body. (4.28.24 P)
Gross and subtle bodies
43. Just as the capital of a state is especially gorgeously filled with various high
buildings and lustrous palaces, similarly the heart of the body is filled with
various desires and plans for material enjoyment. (4.25.15 P)
44. Just as when a person squeezes the sugarcane with teeth or a machine, the result
is the same- sugarcane juicc, similarly the living entity enjoys various senses in
different types of bodies, but the result is the same- sense gratification (4.27.14 P)
45. When a person gets a good manager, his estate is very nicely managed, but if the
manager is a thief, his estate is spoiled. Similarly, in his material, conditional
existence, the living entity gives power of attorncy to his mind. As such, he is
liable to be misdirected by his mind into enjoying sense objects. (4.29.7 P)
46. Just as fermentation takes place in the depths of water and only sometimes
manifests as bubbles on the surface, similarly the impressions of our past remain
in the depths of our mind, and at times, resurface suddenly. (4.29.64 P)
47. Just as the full moon exists even though not visible on a dark moon night,
similarly the subtle body of the jiva exists although it is not manifest in a small
child, due to the underdevelopment of his mind and senses. (4.29.72)
48. Just as the caterpillar transports itself from one leaf to another by capturing one
leaf before giving up the other, similarly according to his previous work, the living
entity must give up one body and accept another before giving up the one he has.
(4.29.76-77)
In relation to máyá
49. Just as the water in a laké is gradually sucked up by the big grass straws on its
bank, similarly one's real consciousness becomes lost as a result of continually
thinking of sense objects. (4.22.30)
50. Just as one animál eats up another animál; as wind scatters clouds in the sky,
similarly Time scatters everything in the material existence. (4.24.65)
51. Just as a snake seizes a mouse and very easily swallows him, similarly the Lord as
Time is always alert and suddenly strikes the inattentive living entity, which is
always greedily planning for sense gratification. (4.24.66)
52. Just as a passenger in a forest is attacked by somé thieves and burglars who take
away his money, similarly a family man earns his livelihood with hard labour, but
finally he is plundered by his wife and children. (4.25.19 P)
53. Just as straws and grasses come together and are subsequently separated by the
river's waves, similarly the innumerable living entities within this material world
are brought together and separated by the waves of material nature (time).
(4.28.60 P)
54. Just as little insects are attracted by the brightness of fire and thus enter into it just
to die, similarly the two eyes of the living entity are attracted by bright and
beautiful forms and are entangled. (4.29.10 P)
55. Just as a dccr vainly searches out for the water in the desert and   rifices its own
liic in such an attempt, similarly the living entity vainly searches out for the
satisfaction in this material world and continues to suffer (4.29.21 P)
56. Just as a stray dog goes from door to door for food and receives either
punishment or a little food according to his destiny, similarly the living entity
wanders in different species of life in search of satisfaction and receives
happiness or distress according to his karma. (4.29.30-31)
57. Just as a person shifts a burden from his head to his shoulder but still doesn't
become freed from the strains of carrying the burden, similarly a living entity tries
to relieve his suffering by avoiding one material means and creating another, but
still continues to suffer. (4.29.33 P)
58. Just as the deer which is moving in the garden with its mate, enjoying the
humming of the humhlehees, is unaware of a tiger in front of him and of the
hunter poised to shoot him from behind. Similarly, a living entity wandering in
the garden of family life, with his wife, enjoying the humming of his children, is
unaware of time, eating up his life span and the tkatli waiting to kill him.
(4.29.53 P)
59. Just as a flower is attractive in the beginning, enchants with its aroma for somé
time but becomes dctestabie at the end, similarly woman is very attractive in the
beginning, gives sex pleasure for somé perlőd of time but is very disturbing in the
end. (4.29.54)
ABOUT      ^ " ^ ^ " ^ ^ ^ ^ / / / / / / ^
Connecting to Krsna
60. Just as iron kept in fire eventually acts like fire, just as a live copper wire acts like
electricity, similarly the material consciousness under the action of the internál
potency is suddha-sattva existence. (4.3.23 P)
61. Just as different parts of the body engage in the service of the whole body,
similarly the varnásrama body should act for the pleasure of the Lord. (4.6.44 P)
62. Just as in an office it is the duty of the worker to see that the proprietor is
satisfied, similarly it is the duty of all living entities to see that the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is satisfied by one's activity. (4.6.53 P)
63. Just as the elephant that has suffered in the forest fire forgets all its troubles by
entering a river, similarly the mind of living entity tormented by material
miseries experiences transcendental bliss by merging in the Nectarean River of the
Lord's transcendental pastimes. (4.7.35)
64. Just as a body is not beautiful without the head, similarly the sacrificial aréna is
not beautiful without the Supreme Lord. (4.7.36)
65. Just as watering the root of a tree also waters all the branches, twigs, leaves and
flowers, similarly worship of the Lord Krsna alone includes the worship of all the
parts and parcel (demigods). (4.7.43 P)
66. Just as when a fatigued person sees a lotus flower all his fatigue can be
immediately reduced to nil, similarly when an aggrieved person sees the lotus face
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead immediately all his grief is reduced.
(4.8.23 P)
67. Just as each individuai passenger sitting in the airplane shares the totál force of
the airplane which runs at thousands of miles per hour, similarly when the unit
energy is identified with the service of the totál energy, the unit energy becomes as
powerful as the totál energy. (4.8.80 P)
68. Just as dried coconut pulp separates itself from the bondage of its immediate shell
and outer covering, similarly one fully absorbed in devotional service becomes
completely disconnected from both bis subtle and gross body. (4.12.18 P)
69. Just as a troublesome dream cannot be relieved with a troublesome
hallucination, but by waking from the sleep, similarly material existence cannot
be destroyed by remaining in ignorance and illusion, but by awakening to Krsna
consciousness. (4.29.34)
70. Just as a materialist forgets all his hard work and becomes pleased once he gets the
success in his endeavours, similarly the devotee of the Lord forgets all his labours
and austerities as soon as be contacts the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
(4.30.4 P)
71. Just as indigestion caused by excessive consumption of milk preparations is cured
by anotber milk preparation - yogurt mixed with black pepper and salt, similarly
bondage caused by fruitive activities can be destroyed by performing the same
activities for tbe satisfaction of Krsna. (4.30.19 P)
72. Just as tbe bee is completely satisfied by tbe parijára tree, similarly tbe living
entity is completely satisfied by tbe shelter of the Lord's lotus feet. (4.30.32)
Stage of perfection
73. Just as tbe demigods travel in space without touching tbe surface of the earth
whereas ordinary men travel on tbe surface of tbe earth, similarly elevated
transcendentalists may sometimes give up tbe rules and regulations of tbe Vedas,
since they do not need to follow them, but other men must follow them. (4.4.19)
74. Just as if one gets an unripe mangó, it is still a mangó, and wben it is ripe it
remains tbe same mangó, but it has become more tasteful and relishable, similarly
there is devotional service performed according to tbc direction of guru and
sástra and devotional service to the Lord rendered directly in His association.
But they are both tbe same, tbe only difference is tbat one stage is unripe and tbe
other is ripe and more relishable. (4.9.11 P)
Scriptures
75. Just as one's face is fully reflected in a clear mirror, similarly the real goal of
one's life is illuminated through the Vedas. (4.21.42)
76. Just as a person becomes refresbed after smearing tbe scented sandalwood pulp
all over bis body and decorating himself with ornaments, similarly a living entity
becomes refresbed in mind after bearing tbe Vedic instructions about the Lord
and H i s devotees from tbe spiritual master. (4.26.12 P)
77. Although there are so many disturbances in tbe beginning for firewood to burn,
but once tbe fire is completely set, tbe firewood burns steadily, similarly wben
both husband and wife nicely follow the regiilativc priuciples both are benefited
spiritually. (4.28.44 P)
It's power
78. Just as hell metál can turn into gold wben mixed with mercury in a cbemical
process, similarly any conditioned soul can become a Vaisnava by tbe bona fide
process of diksá, or initiation. (4.8.54 P)
79. Just as fire burns up wood and other things to ashes, bhakti-yoga burns away all
dirty and useless material desires. (4.13.9)
80. Just as wben a man is absorbed in a particular thought, be does not beat or see
any external activities, even though they are enacted in bis presence, similarly a
devotee fully absorbed in bhakti does not care what is going on with tbe external
body, being in a state of samádhi. (4.20.11 P)
81. Just as a businessman riding in a motorcar sits in tbe car, supervises its running,
and advises tbe driver, but is still apart from tbe car and is more concerned with bis
business, similarly tbe devotee lives in tbe material body, deals practically with
tbe activities of the body but is unattacbed to it and remains more absorbed in
devotional service. (4.20.12 P)
82. Just as a person who eats can understand tbat bis hunger is satisfied, similarly a
practitioner of bhakti-yoga can directly perceive bis advancement in spiritual
life. (4.21.32 P)
83. Just as wben a river meets tbe sea, tbe river's flow becomes overwbelmed by tbe
tide of the sea, similarly an intelligent devotee plans so many things for tbe
service of tbe Lord tbat bis stagnant material desires become overflooded by tbe
desire to sérve tbe Lord. (4.22.39 P)
84. Just as strong digestive power digests all food, without tbe need for medicine to
aid tbe digestion, similarly tbe fire of devotional service gives all perfect
\\mim:mS!^c
knowledge or detachment from material attractions, without the help of any other
separate endeavours. (4.23.11 P)
85. Just as the maidservants of a queen follow the queen wherever she goes, similarly
material conveniences and liberation come automatically for one engaged in the
service of the spiritual master. (4.28.51 P)
Association of devotees
86. Just as a mad elephant horribly destroys a nicely cultivated garden, similarly an
offender to a Vaisnava can perform any abominable action. (4.2.19 P)
87. Just as tbe sun gives life to many vegetables and flowers or dries up otbers due to
scorching beat, similarly tbe dust of tbc lotus feet of Vaisnavas can cause tbe
greatest good for proper recipients, or the greatest harm for tbe offenders.
(4.4.13 P)
88. Just as a conditioned soul's senses are eager to contact tbe sense objects, similarly
a person should be very eager to receive the saintly person. (4.22.3)
89. Any bousebolder's bousc where tbe devotees are never allowed to come and
where their feet are not washed is like a tree in which all venomous serpents
live. (4.22.11)
90. Just as silver becomes shiny by being polished, similarly tbe heart of a
materialistic person is cleansed of lusty desires by tbe good association of
devotees. (4.22.20 P)
91. Just as a joker's activities simply arouse laugbter due to their funny nature,
similarly a person who tries to repay tbe spiritual master or teacber becomes a
laugbingstock (vinoda-pátram) because it is not possible to repay the debt of the
transcendental message of Krsna. (4.22.47 P)
92. Just as a dog always keeps himself at tbe door of the master and does not allow
any person unfavourable to tbe master to enter, similarly a person sbould engage in
tbe service of a Vaisnava and try to please him in every respect. (4.29.31 P)
93. Just as a businessman is always eager to go to a place where business is
transacted, similarly a devotee is eager to hear from the lips of liberated devotees.
(4.29.39-40 P)
94. Just as tbe sun relieves all fear of tbe darkness of night brought about by thieves
and rogues, a saintly person removes all fear of samsára brought about by
ignorance. (4.31.5)
Qualities of devotees
95. Just as an bonest citizen is faithful to tbe government and does not bribe the
government servants, but it does not mean tbat be disrespects them, similarly a
devotee is faithful in serving the Lord and does not need to worship any demigod,
but it does not mean tbat be disrespects tbe demigods. (4.2.35 P)
96. Just as a bee is always interested in tbe honey in the flower and does not consider
tbe thorns and colours, similarly highly qualified persons accept only the good
qualities of others not considering their had qualities. (4.4.12 P)
97. Just as the waves of a river flow constantly, the great devotees engage in the
Lord's transcendental loving service constantly. (4.9.11)
98. Just as a swan accepts only the milk from a mixture of water and milk, similarly a
paramahamsa accepts only the Supreme Personality of Godhead as his life and
soul, neglecting all external, material things. (4.9.28 P)
99. Just as a tree which is full of fruits and flowers does not stand erect in pride but
instead bends downwards to show submissiveness, similarly great personalities of
power and opulence never become proud. (4.21.5 P)
ypENERAL WiSDOM
100. Just as milk is nice as long as it is not made poisonous by an envious serpent,
similarly material assets (v idyá-tapo-v itta-vapur-vayah-kulaih) are nice, as long
as one is not malicious in nature. (4.3.17 P)
101. Although tigers are very kind to their cubs, it is also known that sometimes they
eat them, similarly malicious persons though kind to their children should not be
trusted, because they are always unsteady. (4.3.18 P)
102. Just as an earthen pot once broken cannot be repaired by any means, similarly tbe
heart or mind once hurt by someone cannot be reinstated easily. (4.8.36 P)
103. Just as medicina! treatment acts upon diseased person and cures bim completely,
similarly good instructions act upon a tbe bewildered person and enlighten bim.
(4.11.31)
104. Just as a child depending on tbe able father is completely satisfied, similarly the
citizens of tbe state being protected by tbe state or the king sbould remain
satisfied in every respect. (4.12.12 P)
105. Just as a blind eye is unbearably painful for a blind person, similarly a son born
without good qualities is unbearably painful to a married coupie. (4.13.44 P)
106. Just as for a person trapped inside a blind well, getting out of it is very difficult,
similarly for an attached bousebolder to get out of tbe material home is very
difficult. (4.13.46 P)
107. Just as wben a fire blazes on both ends of a log, tbe ants in the middle are in a
very dangerous situation, similarly citizens of a kingdom are in a dangerous
mmMmMMMMMMmmmM
position when faced with an irresponsible king on one side and thieves and
rogues on the other. (4.14.8)
108. Just as water kept in a cracked pot leaks out, similarly the spiritual power of the
saintly person diminishes if he neglects the unfortunate people. (4.14.41)
109. Just as a good tree within a garden or forest fills the forest with the fragrance of
its flowers, similarly a good son within a family makes the whole family famous
all over the world. (4.30.12 P)
A B O U T O T H E R PROCESSES
Karma-kánda
110. Just as the honey in a flower lasts only a short while at most while the flower itself
exists, similarly the Vedic promises of better standards of living in tbe higher
planets are futile, being temporary in nature. (4.2.25 P)
111. Just as modern scientists test tbe effectiveness of medicines on animals, similarly
great sages and realized souls tested their reaíization of yajna-mantras by animál
sacrifice. (4.4.6 P)
112. Just as crows deligbt in eating tbe remnants of food which has been thrown into
tbe dustbin, similarly ritualistic performcrs deligbt in enjoying tbe sense objects
which have been rejected by renounced, self-realized souls. (4.4.21 P)
113. Just as tbe modern astronauts who go to tbe moon by force of jet propulsion
have to come down again after exbausting their fuel, similarly followers of
Karma-kánda who get elevated to tbe heavenly planets by force of yajnas and
pious activities also have to return to tbe earthly planet once their pious activities
are exbausted. (4.9.10 P)
114. Just as a departmental tax coUector of a government cannot collect taxes for bis
personal account but can realize them for tbe government, similarly tbe demigods
cannot accept sacrificial offerings for themselves, but they can accept them for tbe
Supreme Personality of Godhead. (4.21.34 P)
115. Just as bees attempt to enjoy tbe honey they have coUected, but they are bitten by
each other and thus they enjoy and suffer at tbe same time, similarly humán beings
collect money from various sources and create large empires, however after these
empires are created, they have to suffer tbe bites of other nations. (4.24.64 P)
116. Just as for tbe pleasure of wearing a gold nose pin or earring, one has to pierce
tbe nose or ear, similarly if one wishes to become a millionaire, be has to work
very hard at every moment. (4.25.9 P)
L ^ | ^ ^ 2 | M | C ^ Í -                                       4. Analogies                        |
117. Just as a government may issue trade licenses in order for its citizens to act in a
certain way, similarly the Vedas contain injunctions that restrain and regulate all
fruitive activities of living entities. (4.26.7 P)
Jnána-kánda
118. Just as there is restriction for a l a w student to not enter a law college unless they
have been graduated from all lower grades, similarly there is restriction for a
student of the Vedas to not study tbe Vedic literatures unless they have acquired
tbe brahminical qualifications. (4.2.13 P)
119. Just as if a person flies in outer space, be can go very high up,       but unless be
reacbes a planet be must come down again to the eartís,                 similarly tbe
impersonalists who reacb tbe pararii padam of the impersonal            brabma-jyoti,
unless they enter into tbe Vaikuntha planets, must come down            again to rhis
matéria! w o r i d . (4.21.7 P)
120. Just as it is very difficult to stop tbe flow of the river with one's bare hands,
similarly it is very difficult to control the senses with jnána and yoga. (4.22.39)
121. Just as even tbe very expert swimmer cannot possibly survive if attacked by
sharks, similarly so-cal!ed svámis and yogis though they advertise themselves as
competent cannot possibly survive if they fali prey to máyá, represented by a
woman. (4.22.40 P)
Varnásrama
122. Just as a banker keeps tbe property of an owner in their custody and allows bim to
witbdraw at bis will, similarly ksatriyas and vaisyas keep tbe world in their
custody on bebalf of brahmanas and allow them to take from tbis property at their
will. (4.22.46 P)
Appendix
\C^A       OUR PUBLICATIONS
I
\%\\
iM
I     w
1:^1
.«^4
COMING SOON...
tv*,
•tA*
í
What is special: the clarity of both the text   Study guides such as the present publication ara
and its graphic presentation, enabling a fuU     to be enthusiatically welcomed by students of
and penetrating comprehension of the           the text. Such volumes will be most useful for
Bhagavatam's structure and profundity.                     dasses and workshops.
- H H DEVAMRITA SWAMI                     - Prof. PAUL SHERBOW, Rutgers University
I pray that each reader may enter deeper and     I found Bhagavata Subodhini very interesting
deeper into the knowledge and devotional love        and useful, for it presents the contents of
(Bhakti ras) of the essence of all Vedas -    Bhagavatam in a systematic and lucid manner.
Srimad Bhagavatam.                       This book is like a Bhagavatam digest.
Bhagavata Subodhini is a praiseworthy project      It has increased my appetite for Bhagavatam
for deepening our appreciation of the        study and gain great spiritual advantage. Thanks
Bhagavatam, particularly from the insight of    to Bhaktivedanta Vidyapitha for their dedicated
Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti.              efforts in making Srila Prabhupada's master
- H H BHANU SWAMI                      piece work more easy and accessible for all.
- HG RADHESHYAM DAS
Drawing strength from the Bhaktivedanta
Purports and Bhagavad commentaries by Srila
Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura, Bhagavata
Subodhini is a great tool for an in-depth,
systematic and scrutinising study of Srimad
Bhagavatam.
- H H LOKANATHA SWAMI
www.vidyapitha.in       www.tulsibooks.com
