--- SOURCE: Disciple-Course-SHB-5th-Edition-March-2017/index.html ---
Disciple-Course-SHB-5th-Edition-March-2017
ISKCON
Disciple Course
Students Handbook
Fifth Edition, Gaura-pürëimä 2017.
International Society For Krishna Consciousness
Founder-Acharya His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami, Çréla Prabhupäda.
ISKCON Disciple Course 5th Edition Gaura-pürëimä 2017.
Artwork [or photos, or text] courtesy of The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, Inc.
www.krishna.com. Used with permission.
The ISKCON Disciple Course has been developed with the authority of the GBC Guru
Services Committee. The course may only be taught by authorized teachers registered with
the ISKCON Disciple Course Secretariat.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed, without the authorization of the
ISKCON Disciple Course Secretariat (idcsecretariate@gmail.com).
Welcome!
Welcome to the ISKCON Disciple Course. This is your Seminar Handbook which you’ll be
using throughout the course, and which we hope you’ll keep and use as a reference
throughout your devotional career. Therefore, please look after this booklet carefully. Take
many notes as you will be studying a variety of interesting and important topics.
This ISKCON Disciples Course is a training program which is meant to help you deepen
your understanding of guru-tattva and gurupädäçraya within the multiple guru culture of
ISKCON. It is designed for new devotees preparing to take initiation, but is also
recommended for leaders, preachers councilors and educators in ISKCON.
The course was developed over a two-year period under the direction of the GBC Guru
Services Committee, with the combined efforts of leading educators in ISKCON.
This ISKCON Disciple Course is based on the teachings of Çréla Prabhupäda and current
ISKCON Law and gives reference to the writings from the broader Gauòéya Vaiñëava
tradition.
I would like to offer my gratitude to the following devotees who were instrumental in its
creation, including Prahladananda Swami, Bhakti Caitanya Swami, Ravindra Svarupa dasa,
Laxmimoni dasi, Atul Krishna dasa, Gopika Radhika dasi, Ananda Vrindavana dasi, Taraka
dasi, Braja Bihari dasa, Madhavananda das, Hanuman das, and many others. Also special
thanks to the Mayapur Institute for piloting the course.
We also offer our gratitude to the members of the Steering Committee that created the
ISKCON Guru Seminar, out of which the vision and foundation for this Disciple Course
grew. That committee included, in addition to some devotees named above, Jayapataka
Swami, Bhakti Charu Swami, Radhanatha Swami, Garuda dasa and Rukmini dasi.
If you have any queries, please do not hesitate to speak to the facilitator or to contact the
ISKCON Disciple Course Secretariate (idcsecretariate@gmail.com). In the meantime, all
good wishes for the seminar and in your continuing service to Çréla Prabhupäda.
On behalf of all the Vaiñëavas that brought you this Course,
Your servant,
Anuttama dasa
ISKCON Minister of Communications
Member, GBC Guru Services Committee
ISKCON Disciples Course Contents
UNIT ONE:
Lesson 1
Lesson 2
Lesson 3
Lesson 4
UNIT TWO:
Lesson 5
Lesson 6
Lesson 7
UNIT THREE:
Lesson 8
Lesson 9
Lesson 10
Lesson 11
UNIT FOUR:
Lesson 12
Lesson 13
Lesson 14
INTRODUCTION, THEORY AND CONTEXT
Welcome & Introduction
Guru-tattva and Paramparä
Çréla Prabhupäda - ISKCON Founder Äcärya
ISKCON Gurus
Guru-pädäçraya
Selection of Guru
Initiation Vows
ACTING IN RELATIONSHIP WITH THE GURU
Guru-püjä
Guru- sevä
Guru vapu and väëé-sevä
Guru-tyäga
Presenting One’s Guru
Relationships within ISKCON
Course Round Up
APPENDIXES
1. Additional Quotes
2. GBC Statement on the Position of Çréla Prabhupäda
3. Mandatory Qualifications of Dékñä-guru in ISKCON
4. Standards of Conduct for ISKCON Gurus
5. Qualifications for Initiation in ISKCON
6. Rejection of a Fallen “Guru”
7. Harmonizing ISKCON's Lines of Authority
8. GBC Resolution on ISKCON Disciple Course
9. Principles for Creating a Diksa-guru System for ISKCON
10. Classroom Norms
11. Further Reading
Course Schedule
Unit 1
Introduction, Theory and Context
Lesson 1
Welcome & Introduction
Principles and Values
Course Broad Aims
Course Assessment
Lesson 2
Guru-tattva and Paramparä
Guru-tattva
Types of Gurus
Guru-paramparä System
Refuting the Posthumous Ritvik Theory
Lesson 3
Çréla Prabhupäda - ISKCON Founder Äcärya.
Function of the Founder Äcärya
Prabhupäda the Empowered Representative of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu
ISKCON in the Future
Lesson 4
ISKCON Gurus
Attitude of an ISKCON Guru
Guru’s and ISKCON Authorities’ Instructions
Gurus outside of ISKCON
Lesson 1
Welcome & Introduction
Lesson Topics
Classroom Norms
Principles and Values
Course Broad Aims
Course Assessment
Norms for Classroom Behavior
During the course, in order to maintain an appropriate learning environment, students will agree
to follow the Norms for Classroom Behavior. (See Appendix 9, Page 86)
Course Broad Aims
To improve the quality of discipleship within ISKCON in order to promote
the long-term wellbeing of Çréla Prabhupäda’s Society and its members.
We will achieve this by enabling students to:
1. Understand the long-standing principles of discipleship, as presented in the
teachings of Çréla Prabhupäda and the broader Gauòéya Vaiñëava tradition
and appreciate the unique contexts in which these teachings are applied
within ISKCON.
2. Apply these principles to:
a. Form spiritually healthy, constructive relationships with their gurus and
senior Vaiñëavas
b. Act appropriately within those relationships
3. Develop the values and attitudes required of a disciple.
4. Co-operatively serve the Supreme, and His various representatives, in order
to perpetuate Çréla Prabhupäda’s teachings and mission, through both
personal example and instruction.
Aims of the Disciples Course
In what ways could I improve as a disciple?
Course Principles and Values
1. Çréla Prabhupäda’s as Pre-eminent Çikñä Guru
2. Allegiance to ISKCON and Paramparä
3. Respect for Multiple Authorities and senior Vaiñëavas
4. Considerate Selection of Guru
5. Faith in Guru’s Instructions
6. Commitment to Vows & Çréla Prabhupäda’s Mission.
7. Exemplary Sädhana, Conduct and Balanced Lifestyle
8. Inquiry, Humility and Service
9. Favorable Association, Inclusivity and Co-operation
10. Cultivation and Propagation of Holy Name
Course Assessment
OPEN BOOK ASSESSMENT
The following questions, or a selection of them, will be allocated by your course facilitator.
Your responses should be no more than approximately 250 words. Some questions may
require shorter answers. Questions marked with asterisks are mandatory. A minimum
grade of 65% is required for an overall pass. You will receive a report of your assessment
from your facilitator.
CLOSED BOOK ASSESSMENT
Alternatively, your facilitator may administer a closed book multiple choice style test. The
questions will be based upon the open book questions listed below. A minimum grade of
70% is required for an overall pass.
Successful graduates will receive an ISKCON Disciple Course Certificate authorized by the
G.B.C. Guru Services Committee.
UNIT 1
INTRODUCTION, THEORY AND CONTEXT
Guru-tattva and Paramparä
(Lesson 2)
1. Explain the similarities and differences between the two main categories of guru.
2. Give at least four arguments to refute Ritvikvada philosophy. Give appropriate
reference to çästra in your reply.
Gurupädäçraya in ISKCON
(Lessons 3, 5 & 8)
3. Explain Gurupädäçraya in ISKCON.*
4. Explain how Çréla Prabhupäda functions as the preeminent çikñä-guru and Founder
Äcärya of ISKCON.*
5. Why is it important that Çréla Prabhupäda remains the preeminent çikñä-guru of
ISKCON for future generations? *
6. Briefly describe, with reference to current ISKCON Law, appropriate methods of
worship for Çréla Prabhupäda and ISKCON current & future gurus.
ISKCON Gurus
(Lesson 4)
7. Describe the appropriate attitude for an ISKCON guru in regard to the teachings of
Çréla Prabhupäda and the authority structure within ISKCON. *
8. Why should one accept dékñä and çikñä gurus only within ISKCON and not from
outside ISKCON?
9. Describe the appropriate attitude, for an ISKCON disciple, toward gurus in other
Gauòéya Vaiñëava paramparä and organizations.
UNITS TWO & THREE:
ESTABLISHING AND ACTING IN RELATIONSHIP WITH GURU
Selection of Guru & Initiation Vows
(Lesson 6 & 7)
10. Explain the importance of initiation vows with reference to comments from Çréla
Prabhupäda.
11. List some qualifications of guru that you consider important, with reference to çästra
and the ‘Mandatory Qualifications of Dékñä-guru in ISKCON’ (Appendix 3).
12. Discuss appropriate and inappropriate methods and reasons for selecting guru.
Give appropriate reference to çästra and current ISKCON Law in your reply. *
Guru- sevä
(Lessons 9 & 10)
13. Discuss, with examples, the relationship between guru-sevä and service to the
mission of ISKCON? Explain the importance of a balanced approach to these two. *
14. What is guru vapuù and guru väëé-sevä? Which is more important and why?
15. Give at least four examples of appropriate and inappropriate subjects on which to
seek advice from guru. Give appropriate reference to çästra in your reply.
16. Discuss how a disciple should behave toward ones guru’s godbrothers/godsisters.
Give appropriate reference to çästra in your reply.
UNIT FOUR:
Presenting One’s Guru
(Lesson 12 & Lesson 5)
17. Describe what you consider to be the appropriate attitude and behavior, for an
ISKCON disciple, in regard to promoting one’s guru in public and within the society
of Vaiñëavas. Give reference to relevant çästra, and current ISKCON laws in your
response. Why is it important for ISKCON disciples to develop an appropriate
attitude in this regard?*
18. Why is it important to publicly promote Çréla Prabhupäda as the Founder-äcärya and
preeminent çikñä-guru in ISKCON for the present and future?*
Relationships within ISKCON
(Lesson 13)
19. Discuss inappropriate attitudes and behavior, for an ISKCON disciple, in regard to
favoritism or bias on the basis of one’s dékñä guru. Why is it important for ISKCON
disciples to develop an appropriate attitude in this regard? *
20. Describe practical ways of developing and maintaining cooperative relationships with
all ISKCON Vaiñëavas without inappropriate discrimination on the basis of guru. *
Lesson 2
Guru-tattva and Paramparä
Lesson Topics
Guru-tattva
Types of Gurus
Guru-paramparä System
Refuting the Posthumous Ritvik Theory
Guru-tattva
Briefly explain, in your own words, the position of guru.
GURU-TATTVA
The spiritual master is nondifferent from Kåñëa.
guru kåñëa-rüpa hana çästrera pramäëe
guru-rüpe kåñëa kåpä karena bhakta-gaëe
According to the deliberate opinion of all revealed scriptures, the spiritual master is nondifferent
from Kåñëa. Lord Kåñëa in the form of the spiritual master delivers His devotees.
The relationship of a disciple with his spiritual master is as good as his relationship with the
Supreme Lord.
Çré Caitanya-caritämåta Ädi-lélä 1.45
äcäryaà mäà vijänéyän nävamanyeta karhicit
na martya-buddhyäsüyeta sarva-deva-mayo guruù
“One should know the äcärya as Myself and never disrespect him in any way. One should not
envy him, thinking him an ordinary man, for he is the representative of all the demigods.”
Çrémad-Bhägavatam 11.17.27
If one considers the spiritual master an ordinary human being, one is doomed…
It is recommended that one honor the spiritual master as being on an equal status with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Säkñäd dharitvena samasta-çästraiù. This is enjoined in
every scripture. Äcäryaà mäà vijänéyät [SB 11.17.27]. One should consider the äcärya to be
as good as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In spite of all these instructions, if one
considers the spiritual master an ordinary human being, one is doomed.
Purport, Çrémad-Bhägavatam 7.15.26
When he does his business perfectly, he is perfect..
A postman may deliver us a hundred dollars, but we do not consider that the postman is giving
us a hundred dollars. The money is sent by a friend, and it is simply the postman's business to
hand it over as it is, without taking anything or adding anything to it. His perfection is that he
delivers the hundred dollars as it is sent by one's friend. That is his perfection. The postman
may be imperfect in so many ways, but when he does his business perfectly, he is perfect….
Prabhupäda’s Vyäsa-Püjä Day Address, New Våndävana, Sept. 2, 1972
Persons who are less qualified or not liberated… still can act as guru…
The statements of Thakura Bhaktivinode are as good as scriptures because he is liberated
person. Generally the spiritual master comes from the group of such eternal associates of the
Lord; but anyone who follows the principles of such ever liberated persons is as good as one in
the above mentioned group….. A person who is liberated acharya and guru cannot commit any
mistake, but there are persons who are less qualified or not liberated, but still can act as guru
and acharya by strictly following the disciplic succession.
Letter to: Janardana — New York 26 April, 1968
If you follow pure devotee, then you are also pure devotee.
So if you follow pure devotee, then you are also pure devotee. It may not be one is cent percent
pure. Because we are trying to raise ourself from the conditional life. But if we strictly follow the
pure devotee, then we are also pure devotee. So far we do, that is pure. So pure devotee does
not mean one has to become immediately cent percent pure. But if he sticks to the principle
that "We'll follow a pure devotee," then his actions are... He is as good as a pure devotee.
Bhagavad-gétä 2.1-10
Los Angeles, November 25, 1968
Types of Guru
Dékñä-guru (One)
• Gives instruction
• Initiates & officiates connection to Paramparä
• Gives spiritual name
• Gives mantra (mantra-guru)
• Accepts disciples vows
• Removes disciples sinful reactions (at initiation)
Çikñä-guru (Many)
• Gives instruction
• Connects to Paramparä (informal)
“No limit to the number of instructing spiritual masters...”
mantra-guru ära yata çikñä-guru-gaëa
täìhära caraëa äge kariye vandana
I first offer my respectful obeisances at the lotus feet of my initiating spiritual master and all my
instructing spiritual masters.
PURPORT: A devotee must have only one initiating spiritual master because in the scriptures
acceptance of more than one is always forbidden. There is no limit however, to the number of
instructing spiritual masters one may accept. Generally a spiritual master who constantly
instructs a disciple in spiritual science becomes his initiating spiritual master later on.
Çré Caitanya-caritämåta Ädi 1.35
The initiating and instructing spiritual masters are equal
The guru who first initiates one with the mahä-mantra is to be known as the initiator, and the
saints who give instructions for progressive advancement in Kåñëa consciousness are called
instructing spiritual masters. The initiating and instructing spiritual masters are equal and
identical manifestations of Kåñëa, although they have different dealings.
Purport, Çré Caitanya-caritämåta Ädi 1.34
çikñä -guru-brnda krpa koriya apar
sadhake sikhan sadhaner anga-sar
But I consider the numerous instructing spiritual masters (çikñä -gurus) to be very important, for
they show unlimitedly more mercy by training the neophyte devotees in all the essential aspects
of practical devotional service (sadhana-bhakti).
Çré Çré Kalyäëa Kalpa-taru Çréla Bhaktivinode Öhäkura
First Branch: Spiritual Advise (Upadesa) Introduction: Çikñä and Dékñä Gurus
Divya-jïäna
kñapayati
Spiritual
knowledge
Explain/
Destroy
Divya-jïäna
Ikñä
Spiritual
knowledge
(Darçana)
To See
Dékñä
Dékñä
“Dékñä means the initiation to begin transcendental activities..”
That very word initiation suggests, "This is the beginning." Dékñä, dékñä. Di... Divya. There are
two words, divya-jïäna. Divya-jïäna means transcendental, spiritual knowledge. So divya is dé,
and jïänam, kñapayati, explaining, that is kña, dé-kñä. This is called dékñä, dékñä, the
combination. So dékñä means the initiation to begin transcendental activities. That is called
initiation. Therefore we take promise from the disciple that "You chant so many times," "Yes,
sir." "You observe these rules and regulations," "Yes, sir." That is initiation. He has to observe;
he has to chant. Then everything comes automatically.
Lecture, Çrémad-Bhägavatam 6.1.15 -- Auckland, February 22, 1973
The Sanskrit term is called dékñä. Dékñä means... Di, divya-jïänam, transcendental knowledge,
and kñä, ikñä. Ikñä means darçana, to see, or kñapayati, explain. That is called dékñä.
Lecture, Initiation of Bali-mardana Däsä -- Montreal, July 29, 1968
Unless one is initiated … all his devotional activities are useless
adékñitasya vämoru kåtaà sarvaà nirarthakam
paçu-yonim aväpnoti dékñä-virahito janaù
“‘Unless one is initiated by a bona fide spiritual master, all his devotional activities are useless.
A person who is not properly initiated can descend again into the animal species.’”
Hari-bhakti-viläsa (2.6),
quoted from the Viñëu-yämala.
Quoted in Purport Çré Caitanya-caritämåta, Madhya 15.108
Connection between Kåñëa and a person cultivating Kåñëa consciousness is established.
The connection with the spiritual master is called initiation. From the date of initiation by the
spiritual master, the connection between Kåñëa and a person cultivating Kåñëa consciousness
is established. Without initiation by a bona fide spiritual master, the actual connection with
Kåñëa consciousness is never performed.
Nectar of Devotion Introduction
Guru-paramparä System
Evaà paramparä-präptam
This supreme science was thus received through the chain of disciplic succession
Bhagavad-gétä As It Is 4.2
Why do we have to accept living dékñä gurus?
“The Paramparä System..”
The guru does not accept respect from his disciple for his personal self but conveys this
respect to Kåñëa.... it is stated in Bhagavad-gétä that knowledge of Kåñëa is received through
the paramparä, the disciplic succession. Evaà paramparä-präptam [Bg. 4.2]. The guru offers
the same respects to his guru, and his guru offers respects to his, and so it goes all the way to
Kåñëa. Thus the mercy of Kåñëa comes down through the paramparä system, and the respect
offered to Kåñëa is offered up through the paramparä system. One has to learn to approach the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in this way…
Teachings of Lord Kapila, Chapter 13 Perfect Knowledge Through Surrender
One should approach the current link
..the message of Çrémad-Bhägavatam is coming down by disciplic succession, and in order to
receive the real message of Çrémad-Bhägavatam one should approach the current link, or
spiritual master, in the chain of disciplic succession.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam 2.9.7
GURU-PARAMPARÄ SYSTEM
“You cannot jump over to the superior guru…”
So if you want to understand Bhagavad-gétä, then we must understand in the same way as the
person who directly heard from. This is called paramparä system. Suppose I have heard
something from my spiritual master, so I speak to you the same thing. So this is paramparä
system. You cannot imagine what my spiritual master said. Or even if you read some books,
you cannot understand unless you understand it from me. This is called paramparä system.
You cannot jump over to the superior guru, neglecting the next äcärya, immediate next äcärya.
Lecture Çrémad-Bhägavatam 1.15.30 -- Los Angeles, December 8, 1973
Don't try to approach Kåñëa directly, jump over. That is useless.
First of all, your spiritual master, then his spiritual master, then his spiritual master, his spiritual
master, his spiritual master-ultimately Kåñëa. This is the process. Don't try to approach Kåñëa
directly, jump over. That is useless. As you receive knowledge through the steps, paramparä
system, similarly, we should approach Kåñëa through these step.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam 1.2.4 -- Rome, May 28, 1974
One must accept a Vaisnava guru … Not simply by reading books..
One should not proudly think that one can understand the transcendental loving service of the
Lord simply by reading books... One must accept a Vaisnava guru (adau gurv-asrayam), and
then by questions and answers one should gradually learn what pure devotional service to
Krsna is. That is called the parampara system."
Çré Caitanya-caritämåta Antya-lila 7.53, purp.
All these disciples which I am initiating… become future spiritual masters
These students, who are initiated from me, all of them will act as I am doing. Just like I have got
many Godbrothers, they are all acting. Similarly, all these disciples which I am making,
initiating, they are being trained to become future spiritual masters.
Room Conversation Detroit, July 18, 1971
I want to see my disciples become bona fide Spiritual Master
I want to see my disciples become bona fide Spiritual Master and spread Krishna
consciousness very widely, that will make me and Krishna very happy... Keep trained up very
rigidly and then you are bonafide Guru, and you can accept disciples on the same principle. But
as a matter of etiquette it is the custom that during the lifetime of your Spiritual master you
bring the prospective disciples to him, and in his absence or disappearance you can accept
disciples without any limitation. This is the law of disciplic succession.
Letter to Tusta Krsna, December 2, 1975
I wish that in my absence all my disciples become the bona fide spiritual master
Anyone following the order of Lord Caitanya under the guidance of His bona fide representative
can become a spiritual master and I wish that in my absence all my disciples become the bona
fide spiritual master to spread Krishna Consciousness throughout the whole world.
Letter to: Madhusudana - Navadvipa 2 November, 1967
“The more you become in the lower position- then more you are advanced.”
This is called paramparä system. You have to learn how to become servant of the servant of
Kåñëa. The more you become in the lower position—servant, servant, servant, servant,
servant, hundreds times servant, servant—then more you are advanced.
Lecture Bhagavad-gétä 2.2 -- London, August 3, 1973
Arguments Refuting the Posthumous Ritvik Theory
The Posthumous Ritvik Theory is a fallacious theory by which a spiritual master allegedly
acts as dékñä-guru after his departure, through the agency of ritviks or officiating priests.
•
There is no example of one taking dékñä from one’s paraà-guru in any of the bona-fide
Vaiñëava sampradäyas.
•
There is no çästric evidence indicating that one may take dékñä from one’s paraà-guru.
•
Vérabhadra Gosvämé, the son of Lord Nityänanda Prabhu, in a letter to Çréniväsa Äcärya
ostracized one Jaya-gopäl from Vaiñëava society for claiming himself as a disciple of his
Paraà-guru.
•
The argument that there are no qualified dékñä-gurus amongst Prabhupäda's disciples
indicates that Prabhupäda's teachings have not proven effective. So what would be the
use of becoming Prabhupäda’s dékñä disciple through the ritvik priest anyway?
•
Ritvik theory implies that only exceptionally empowered äcäryas can become guru which
is not supported in çästra nor Vaiñëava tradition.
•
Ritvik theory implies that äcäryas can act contrary to çästra.
•
Ritvik theory functions by undermining the natural development of faith in living
Vaiñëavas, which is an essential aspect of bhakti.
•
A ritvik guru gives advice however he does not formally accept the responsibility of
delivering the disciple as a bone-fide dékñä-guru does.
Gauòéya Vaiñëava Abhidhäna, khaëòa 3
Additional points:
Additional Quotes
Lesson 2
Guru-tattva and Paramparä
G URU - TATTVA
Äcärya should be respected just like God.
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura also said, säkñäd-dharitvena samasta-çästrair uktas tathä
bhävyata eva sadbhiù . Äcärya, guru, is as good as God. Säkñäd-dharitvena. Äcärya should be
respected as Kåñëa. Therefore äcäryaà mäà vijänéyän nävamanyeta karhicit [SB 11.17.27]. If
somebody foolishly thinks that "They are worshiping a man. He's like me, and he has taken the
seat, and he's taking worship, respect, from disciples." Sometimes they question like that. But
they do not know that how äcärya should be respected. Äcärya should be respected säkñäddharitvena, just like God. It is not exaggeration. It is according to the çästra. And äcärya also
accepts all these respectful obeisances to carry to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam 1.7.45-46 -- Våndävana, October 5, 1976
Associate of Çrématé Rädhäräëé & representation of Nityänanda Prabhu
In his prayers to the spiritual master, Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura confirms that all the
revealed scriptures accept the spiritual master to be identical with the Personality of Godhead
because he is a very dear and confidential servant of the Lord. Gauòéya Vaiñëavas therefore
worship Çréla Gurudeva (the spiritual master) in the light of his being the servitor of the
Personality of Godhead. In all the ancient literatures of devotional service and in the more
recent songs of Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura, Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura and other unalloyed
Vaiñëavas, the spiritual master is always considered either one of the confidential associates of
Çrématé Rädhäräëé or a manifested representation of Çréla Nityänanda Prabhu.
Çré Caitanya-caritämåta Ädi-lélä 1.46
The spiritual master is the external manifestation of the caitya-guru…
The supreme spiritual master is Kåñëa, who is therefore known as caitya-guru. This refers to
the Supersoul, who is sitting in everyone's heart. He helps from within as stated in Bhagavadgétä, and He sends the spiritual master, who helps from without. The spiritual master is the
external manifestation of the caitya-guru, or the spiritual master sitting in everyone's heart.
Purport, Çrémad-Bhägavatam 4.8.44
If you follow pure devotee, then you are also pure devotee.
“We may not be cent percent perfect, but as far as possible, if we follow the instruction as it is,
that much perfect. In this way one will get perfection. So one has to follow. The same example,
try to understand, that a perfect, expert technologist or technician or mechanic is working, and
somebody is working under his instruction. So this somebody, because he is strictly working
under the instruction of the expert, he's also expert. He may not be cent percent expert, but his
work is expert. Is that clear? Because he is working under the expert. Do you follow? So if you
follow pure devotee, then you are also pure devotee. It may not be one is cent percent pure.
Because we are trying to raise ourself from the conditional life. But if we strictly follow the pure
devotee, then we are also pure devotee. So far we do, that is pure. So pure devotee does not
mean one has to become immediately cent percent pure. But if he sticks to the principle that
"We'll follow a pure devotee," then his actions are... He is as good as a pure devotee.
Bhagavad-gétä 2.1-10, Los Angeles, November 25, 1968
T YPES OF G URUS
“They are not many; they are one, guru-tattva..”
The guru is offered first the respectful prayers, vande gurün. And gurün, bahu-vacana, plural
number, that many gurus. But they are not many; they are one, guru-tattva…
Lecture, Çré Caitanya-caritämåta, Ädi-lélä 1.1 Mäyäpur, March 25, 1975
Two kinds of instructing spiritual masters
çikñä-guruke ta’ jäni kåñëera svarüpa antaryämé, bhakta-çreñöha,—ei dui rüpa
There are two kinds of instructing spiritual masters. One is the liberated person fully
absorbed in meditation in devotional service, and the other is he who invokes the disciple’s
spiritual consciousness by means of relevant instructions.
Çré Caitanya-caritämåta, Ädi-lélä 1.47
Dékñä purifies ones previous sinful reactions
dékñä-käle bhakta kare ätma-samarpaëa
sei-käle kåñëa täre kare ätma-sama
At the time of initiation, when a devotee fully surrenders unto the service of the Lord, Kåñëa
accepts him to be as good as Himself.
sei deha kare tära cid-änanda-maya
apräkåta-dehe täìra caraëa bhajaya
When the devotee’s body is thus transformed into spiritual existence, the devotee, in that
transcendental body, renders service to the lotus feet of the Lord.
Çré Caitanya-caritämåta Antya 4.192-193
Dékñä & Çikñä-guru
…the spiritual master who initiates according to the regulations of the çästras is called the
dékñä-guru, and the spiritual master who gives instructions for elevation is called the çikñä-guru.
Çré Caitanya-caritämåta Madhya 8.128
dékñä-puraçcaryä-vidhi apekñä nä kare
jihvä-sparçe ä-caëòäla sabäre uddhäre
“One does not have to undergo initiation or execute the activities required before initiation. One
simply has to vibrate the holy name with his lips. Thus even a man in the lowest class [caëòäla]
can be delivered.
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu to Satyaräja Khän, Çré Caitanya-caritämåta, Madhya 15.108
The spiritual master accepts the sinful activities of his disciples
The spiritual master accepts the sinful activities of his disciples from the first initiation. I may
give initiation very easily, but what can I do? I am prepared to go to hell for service of Lord.
Letter to: Jadurani — New Vrindaban 4 September, 1972
Eternal bond begins from the first day he hears.
Regarding your questions, second initiation is real initiation. First initiation is the preliminary,
just to make him prepared, just like primary and secondary education. The first initiation gives
him chance to become purified, and when he is actually purified then he is recognized as a
brahmana and that means real initiation. The eternal bond between disciple and spiritual
master begins from the first day he hears. Just like my spiritual master. In 1922 he said in our
first meeting, you are educated boys, why don't you preach this cult. That was the beginning,
now it is coming to fact. Therefore the relationship began from that day.
Letter to: Jadurani — New Vrindaban 4 September, 1972
G URU - PARAMPARÄ S YSTEM
First of all you become devotee of My devotee.. däsa-däsa-däsänudäsaù
We cannot jump over to Kåñëa. That is another nonsense. We must approach Kåñëa through
guru. That is paramparä system. Kåñëa is not so cheap thing that you can jump over.
Somebody says, "Oh, why shall I accept guru? I can approach Kåñëa directly." No. Kåñëa does
not accept such... Mad-bhaktaù püjäbhyadhikaù. Kåñëa says that "First of all you become
devotee of My devotee." Caitanya Mahäprabhu says, gopé-bhartuù pada-kamalayor däsa-däsadäsänudäsaù: "I am the servant of the servant of the servant of Kåñëa.
Lecture Bhagavad-gétä 2.2, London, August 3, 1973
A bona fide spiritual master directly points out the foolishness of a disciple…
A person who is puffed up by so-called education and who has no humility does not seek the
protection of a bona fide spiritual master. He thinks that he does not require a spiritual master
and that he can achieve the highest perfection by his own efforts. Such persons are not eligible
for the study of Vedänta-sütra. Those who are under the spell of material energy do not follow
the instructions of the disciplic succession but try to manufacture something of their own and
thereby step outside the sphere of Vedänta study. A bona fide spiritual master must always
condemn such independent mental speculators. If the bona fide spiritual master directly points
out the foolishness of a disciple, it should not be taken otherwise.
TLC 18: The Conversations with Prakäçänanda
Thakura Bhaktivinode was not official Spiritual Master of Gaura Kisora dasa Babaji Maharaja
Thakura Bhaktivinode was not official Spiritual Master of Gaura Kisora dasa Babaji Maharaja.
Gaura Kisora dasa Babaji Maharaja was already renounced order, Paramahamsa, but Thakura
Bhaktivinode, while He was even playing the part of a householder, was treated by Gaura
Kisora dasa Babaji Maharaja as Preceptor, on account of His highly elevated spiritual
understanding, and thus He was always treating Him as His Spiritual Master. The Spiritual
Master is divided into two parts; namely, siksa guru and diksa guru. So officially Bhaktivinode
Thakura was like siksa guru of Gaura Kisora das Babaji Maharaja.
Letter to: Dayananda Allston, Mass 1 May, 1969
Disciplic succession does not mean one has to be directly a disciple.
Another point is that disciplic succession does not mean one has to be directly a disciple of a
particular person. The conclusions which we have tried to explain in our Bhagavad-gita As It Is
is the same as those conclusions of Arjuna. …Another example is that a tree has many
branches, and you will find one leaf here and another leaf there. But if you take this leaf and the
other leaf and you press them both, you will see that the taste is the same. The taste is the
conclusion, and from the taste you can understand that both leaves are from the same tree.
Letter to: Kirtanananda -- Los Angeles 25 January, 1969
The Guru is One.
The guru is one because he comes in disciplic succession. What Vyäsadeva and Kåñëa taught
five thousand years ago is also being taught now. There is no difference between the two
instructions. Although hundreds and thousands of äcäryas have come and gone, the message
is one. The real guru cannot be two, for the real guru does not speak differently from his
predecessors.
Science of Self Realization 2a: Choosing a Spiritual Master What Is a Guru?
Lesson 3
Çréla Prabhupäda - ISKCON Founder Äcärya.
Lesson Topics
Function of the Founder Äcärya
Prabhupäda the Empowered Representative of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu
ISKCON in the Future
Function of the Founder Äcärya
To found:
To give a basis or firm support to.
To ground in (a subject of instruction).
To set up or establish for the first time (an institution, etc.) with provision
for its perpetual existence.
Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd Edition, Oxford University Press
List below ways Çréla Prabhupäda functions as ISKCON's Founder- äcärya:
Çréla Prabhupäda has a unique relationship with every ISKCON devotee.
As the Founder-Acarya of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness (ISKCON) and
the preeminent teacher and ultimate authority within our society, Çréla Prabhupäda has a
unique relationship with every ISKCON devotee.
303. GBC Statement on the Position of Çréla Prabhupäda (March 2013)
Çréla Prabhupäda:
The Empowered Representative of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu
In the box below, list reasons why we accept Çréla Prabhupäda as the empowered
representative of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu for the modern age
mora senapati-bhakta
ebe nama sankirtana tikshna khadaga laiya antara asura jivera phelibe katiya
yadi papi chadi dharma dure dese yaya mora senapati-bhakta yaibe tathaya
Taking the sharp sword of the congregational chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra,I will root out
& destroy the demoniac mentality in the hearts of all the conditioned souls. If some sinful
people escape and giving up religious principles go to far off countries, then my Senapati
Bhakta will come at that time to give them Krsna consciousness.
Locana Dasa Thakura in his Caitanya Mangala
(Sutra-khanda, song 12, texts 564-565)
ISKCON in The Future
What can be done to ensure that Çréla Prabhupäda remains ISKCON’s Founder Äcärya and
preeminent çikñä-guru in the future? Write your thoughts in the box below.
I am simply the bearer of the message from Lord Caitanya …
I also thank you very much for your appreciation of my books and letters and for my speaking
in the meetings. They are not my words, as I have repeatedly informed you that I am simply the
bearer of the message from Lord Caitanya through the disciplic succession and I do not make
any addition or subtraction. Similarly, if you all carry these words successively, then the
transcendental parampara system will be exactly maintained and people in general will be
benefited.
Letter to: Bhagavan — Los Angeles 10 January, 1970
Lesson 4
ISKCON Gurus
Lesson Topics
Attitude of an ISKCON Guru
Guru’s and ISKCON Authorities’ Instructions
Gurus outside of ISKCON
Attitude of an ISKCON Guru
What do you consider is the appropriate attitude in general for an ISKCON guru (current and
future) in regard to:
• the teachings of Çréla Prabhupäda
• the authority structure within ISKCON?
Write down your thoughts….
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ISKCON GURUS AND ISKCON AUTHORITIES
NOTE: The above chart is for educational purposes only and is not an administrative mandate. It illustrates
that ISKCON members all serve under the direction of Çréla Prabhupäda and the GBC. And, in ISKCON we all
have multiple authorities whom we should respect and serve in a cooperative spirit.
Guru’s and ISKCON Authorities’ Instructions
GROUP EXERCISE:
Perform a short skit showing:
An inappropriate way of dealing with a situation where in the instructions given by one’s local
ISKCON authority differ from the instructions given by one’s guru.
An appropriate way of dealing with a situation where in the instructions given by one’s local
ISKCON authority differ from the instructions given by one’s guru.
Use the space below to take notes during the de-briefing on the skits
Gurus Outside of ISKCON
List, in the table below, some of the benefits of accepting dékñä and çikñä gurus within
ISKCON.
A TTITUDE OF AN ISKCON G URU
Service to Çréla Prabhupäda and our guru parampara.
Those who accept the service of dékñä guru or çikña guru in ISKCON are required to be
exemplary in representing Çréla Prabhupäda’s teaching in their words and personal behavior.
The çikña guru gives spiritual instruction and inspiration on behalf of Çréla Prabhupäda and our
guru parampara. The dékñä guru gives spiritual instruction, inspiration, formal initiation, a
spiritual name, and later imparts the sacred Gayatri mantras to a qualified disciple as a service
to Çréla Prabhupäda and our guru parampara.
303. GBC Statement on the Position of Çréla Prabhupäda (March 2013)
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura’s governing body
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura, at the time of his departure, requested all his disciples to
form a governing body and conduct missionary activities cooperatively. He did not instruct a
particular man to become the next äcärya. But just after his passing away, his leading
secretaries made plans, without authority, to occupy the post of äcärya, and they split into two
factions over who the next äcärya would be. Consequently, both factions were asära, or
useless, because they had no authority, having disobeyed the order of the spiritual master.
Çré Caitanya-caritämåta Ädi 12.8
G URU ’ S AND ISKCON A UTHORITIES ’ I NSTRUCTIONS
Obey Çréla Prabhupäda but not follow the G.B.C…
“When they say they don’t like ISKCON and the G.B.C., they are really saying they don’t like to
follow my order. That means they don’t like my order. That means they don’t have faith in my
order. That means they don’t have faith in me. That means guru-aparädha. To say they have
faith in me is just hypocrisy.”
8th February, 1975, ISKCON Honolulu, Hawaii
SP Lila-Addendum to SP lilamrta—by SDG
G URUS OUTSIDE OF ISKCON
Never try to hear someone who is not in our line
Better you should stick to hearing from authorized persons, like your Spiritual Master or
experienced Godbrothers. But never try to hear someone who is not in our line. It is simply a
waste of time to hear and then again have to rectify the mistake.
Letter to: Hamsaduta — Hamburg 5 September, 1969
Please avoid them
“I have now issued orders that all my disciples should avoid all of my Godbrothers. They should
not have any dealings with them nor even correspondence, nor should they give them any of
my books or should they purchase any of their books, neither should you visit any of their
temples. Please avoid them.”
Letter to: Visvakarma — Bombay 9 November, 1975
“Give him prasadam, honor him as an elder Vaisnava, but he cannot speak or lecture..”
All Vaisnavas are authorities to preach Krishna Consciousness, but still, there are degrees of
authorities. On the whole, if his (Bon Maharaja) motive is to suppress me and that is why he
has come here, how we can receive him? He has already given one Professor a wrong
impression. He may be treated as a guest, if he comes to our center, give him prasadam, honor
him as an elder Vaisnava, but he cannot speak or lecture. If he wants to lecture, you can tell
him that there is already another speaker scheduled. That's all.”
Letter to: Satsvarupa — Honolulu 4 June, 1975
Additional Quotes
Lesson 4
ISKCON Gurus
GBC
“The Governing Body Commission (GBC) will be the ultimate managing authority of the entire
International Society for Krishna Consciousness.”
Çréla Prabhupäda’s Declaration of Will, June 1977
Gaudiya Mission has failed in preaching work..
You must be engaged continually for these missionary activity. The Gaudiya Mission has failed
in preaching work because they adopted this principle. As soon as they got a little shelter under
the name of Matha, or temple, and a few dozen of..., not few dozen, one dozen [disciples], then
Hare Krsna,’ showing that he is very great chanter. And what is your preaching? . . . Therefore
my Guru Maharaja condemned this policy. Mana tumi kisera vaisnava: ‘What kind of Vaisnava
you are?’ Pratisthara tare nirjanera ghare: ‘And simply for cheap popularity, Oh, he is a
Vaisnava. He is chanting. All right.’ . . . No botheration, because if there is no preaching, there
is no botheration. You can sit down and show people, ‘I have now become a very liberated
soul,’ and chant and meditate. That means sleeping. This sort of business is condemned by my
Guru Maharaja. Pratisthara tare nirjanera ghare tava harinama kevala. This is simply cheating.
He did not approve this kind of business. He did not approve. He wanted to see that everyone
is engaged in preaching work..
Çrémad-Bhägavatam 6.3.18 -- Gorakhpur, February 11, 1971
Accepting the authority of the GBC was Çréla Prabhupäda’s order
Vaisnava doctrine holds that the essential qualifying characteristic of a guru is that he follows
the order of his own guru. He never becomes the master, but always remains the servant.
Consequently, to be qualified as a guru in ISKCON it was essential to strictly follow the order of
Çréla Prabhupäda, who had decreed that all devotees must serve co-operatively under the
authority of the GBC. Accepting the authority of the GBC board was not a voluntary option—
because it was Çréla Prabhupäda’s order, it was necessary to guru-hood itself.
Guru Reform—Ravindra Swarupa Dasa—ISKCON Communications Journal#2.1
The disciple must carry out the spiritual master’s instructions without deviation.
Çré Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Gosvämé Mahäräja comments in this connection, “One can
become perfectly successful in the mission of his life if he acts exactly according to the words
he hears from the mouth of his spiritual master.” This acceptance of the words of the spiritual
master is called çrauta-väkya, which indicates that the disciple must carry out the spiritual
master’s instructions without deviation. Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura remarks in this
connection that a disciple must accept the words of his spiritual master as his life and soul.
Çré Caitanya-caritämåta Ädi 7.72
Obey Çréla Prabhupäda but not follow his G.B.C…
Another confrontation took place in Çréla Prabhupäda’s room, with devotees who insisted they
could faithfully obey Çréla Prabhupäda but could not follow his G.B.C. representative or his
ISKCON….The devotees in Prabhupäda’s room had formerly been leaders of ISKCON Hawaii
but had left and were now threatening to use the funds and properties in their own name.
Prabhupäda kept asking them simply, “Why did you leave? Why don’t you stay? Why don’t you
surrender?” But they insisted that while they trusted Prabhupäda, they could not trust the
G.B.C.
One of the G.B.C. members in the room became exasperated with their refusal to accept
Prabhupäda’s simple request of surrender. “You say that you accept Prabhupäda?”
“Yes,” they replied.
“And you say you have faith in him?”
“Yes.”
“You say that whatever he asks, you can follow?”
“Yes.”
“So, then, if Prabhupäda asks you to follow the G.B.C., will you do it?” The room became tense
and silent.
“No, we cannot follow.”
When they uttered that no, Çréla Prabhupäda dropped his fist on his table and pointed to the
deviant devotees, declaring, “Just see the hypocrisy!”
Even after Prabhupäda’s stark conclusion, they maintained their “we-surrender-to-you-but-notto-ISKCON” philosophy until Prabhupäda asked them to leave. To the other devotees
remaining in the room Prabhupäda remarked, “When they say they don’t like ISKCON and the
G.B.C., they are really saying they don’t like to follow my order. That means they don’t like my
order. That means they don’t have faith in my order. That means they don’t have faith in me.
That means guru-aparädha. To say they have faith in me is just hypocrisy.”
8th February, 1975, Honolulu, SP Lila-Addendum to SP lilamrta—by SDG
A disciple should always remain a fool before his spiritual master…
Caitanya Mahäprabhu Himself presented the perfect example of how to be a disciple. A
spiritual master knows very well how to engage each disciple in a particular duty, but if a
disciple, thinking himself more advanced than his spiritual master, gives up his orders and acts
independently, he checks his own spiritual progress. Every disciple must consider himself
completely unaware of the science of Kåñëa and must always be ready to carry out the orders
of the spiritual master to become competent in Kåñëa consciousness. A disciple should always
remain a fool before his spiritual master…
Çré Caitanya-caritämåta: Ädi-lélä 7.72
A thoughtful man must act in this way, learning to distinguish right from wrong..
We should therefore live in such a way that we keep ourselves always healthy and strong in
mind and intelligence so that we can distinguish the goal of life from a life full of problems. A
thoughtful man must act in this way, learning to distinguish right from wrong, and thus attain the
goal of life.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam Purport 7.6.5
Unit Two:
Establishing the Relationship with Guru
Lesson 5
Guru-pädäçraya
Prabhupädäçraya
Dékñä /çikñä guru-pädäçraya and Prabhupädäçraya
Lesson 6
Selection of Guru
Qualifications of a Bona-fide Guru
Selecting a Guru
Lesson 7
Initiation Vows
Strictly Following Initiation Vows
Challenges Faced Following Initiation Vows
Solutions to Challenges
Steps of Rectification
Lesson 5
Guru-pädäçraya
Lesson Topics
Prabhupädäçraya
Dékñä /çikñä guru-pädäçraya
Guidelines for Prabhupädäçraya
List some specific ways we can develop a deep /authentic devotional relationship with Çréla
Prabhupäda from the beginning of our spiritual life.
Çréla Prabhupäda has a unique relationship with every ISKCON devotee.
As the Founder-Acarya of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness (ISKCON) and
the preeminent teacher and ultimate authority within our society, Çréla Prabhupäda has a
unique relationship with every ISKCON devotee.
303. GBC Statement on the Position of Çréla Prabhupäda (March 2013)
Instruct new members to take shelter of Çréla Prabhupäda
ISKCON devotees shall instruct new members to take shelter of Çréla Prabhupäda and to
receive guidance, training and assistance from those who are instructing them in Krishna
consciousness. ISKCON members shall choose when and from whom they wish to request
initiation. They must focus their attention on Çréla Prabhupäda as the Founder-Acarya and as
their preeminent çikñä guru.
ISKCON Law 7.2.1 First (Harinama) Initiation
Chant at least the first of Çréla Prabhupäda’s pranama mantras
After chanting the pranama mantra of their dékñä guru, all grand-disciples and future
generations should chant at least the first of Çréla Prabhupäda’s pranama mantras while
offering obeisances as a means of respecting the Founder-Acarya.
ISKCON Law 7.2.1 First (Harinama) Initiation
Dékñä /çikñä Guru-pädäçraya and Prabhupädäçraya
What is the relationship between dékñä /çikñä guru-pädäçraya and Prabhupädäçraya?
Guru-pädäçraya in ISKCON
A disciple in ISKCON should take shelter from three sources:
Çréla
Prabhupädä
Dékñä- guru
Çikñä-gurus
Disciple
Çikñä-guru not speaking something against the teachings of the dékñä-guru…
Sometimes a dékñä-guru is not present always. Therefore one can take learning, from an
advanced devotee. That is called the çikñä-guru. Çikñä-guru does not mean he is speaking
something against the teachings of the dékñä-guru. He is not a çikñä-guru. He is a rascal.
Bhagavad-gétä 17.1-3 -- Honolulu, July 4, 1974
A devotee is delivered through a combination of various manifestations of His mercy.
As such, a devotee is ultimately delivered by Sri Krishna acting through a combination of
various manifestations of His mercy. These include, but are not limited to, the caitya guru, Çréla
Prabhupäda, the guru parampara, one’s dékñä guru, other çikña gurus, the Holy Name, sastra,
and the nine processes of devotional service.
303. GBC Statement on the Position of Çréla Prabhupäda (March 2013)
Spiritually mature ISKCON managers may be main çikñä gurus..
Spiritually mature managers may be the main çikñä gurus for devotees who are not their
initiated disciples, and such relationships are to be fully encouraged by the initiating spiritual
masters.
Harmonizing ISKCON's Lines of Authority (Page 83)
Çréla Prabhupäda is the preeminent Çikñä-guru for all members of ISKCON.
Within these cooperative elements, Çréla Prabhupäda, as the Founder-Acarya of the
International Society for Krishna Consciousness, is the preeminent çikñä-guru for all members
of ISKCON. All members of ISKCON, for all generations, are encouraged to seek shelter of
Çréla Prabhupäda. All members of ISKCON are entitled and encouraged to have a personal
relationship with Çréla Prabhupäda through his books, teachings, service, and his ISKCON
society.
303. GBC Statement on the Position of Çréla Prabhupäda (March 2013)
Lesson 6
Selecting Guru
Lesson Topics
Qualifications of a Bona-fide Guru
Selecting a Guru
What are you looking for in a Guru?
Qualifications of a Bona-fide Guru
What are the qualifications of a bona-fide Guru? Take notes from the discussion, in the box
below:
väco vegaà manasaù krodha-vegaà jihvä-vegam udaropastha-vegam
etän vegän yo viñaheta dhéraù sarväm apémäà påthivéà sa çiñyät
A sober person who can tolerate the urge to speak, the mind's demands, the actions of anger
and the urges of the tongue, belly and genitals is qualified to make disciples all over the world.
Upadeçämåta Verse 1
Two qualifications…
tad-vijïänärthaà sa gurum eväbhigacchet
samit-päëiù çrotriyaà brahma-niñöham
To understand these things properly, one must humbly approach, with firewood in hand, a
spiritual master who is learned in the Vedas and firmly devoted to the Absolute Truth.
Muëòaka Upaniñad 1.2.12
A bona fide guru does not impart some self-styled, concocted knowledge; his knowledge is
standard and received from the paramparä system. He is also firmly fixed in the service of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead (brahma-niñöham). These are his two qualifications: he must
have heard the Vedic knowledge through the disciplic succession, and he must be established
in service to the Supreme Lord. He does not have to be a very learned scholar, but he must
have heard from the proper authority.
Teachings of Lord Kapila, Verse 4, Approaching a Bona Fide Guru
Selecting a Guru
List, in the box below, some inappropriate reasons for selecting a guru.
Steps for Selecting Guru
The following steps are adapted from ISKCON Law regarding steps toward initiation. The
laws are presented in full in Appendix 5, Page 72.
One Year Preparatory Period
Prabhupädäçraya
Dékñä & Çikñä Guru-pädäçraya
Hari-näma initiation
One Year Preparatory Period
Engage favorably in devotional service
Strictly follow 4 regulative principles
Chant sixteen rounds a day
Attend full morning program (temple resident)
Attend morning program at home or Näm-haööa (non temple resident)
Prabhupädäçraya,
Focus attention on Çréla Prabhupäda as preeminent çikñä guru.
Chant Çréla Prabhupäda’s pranama mantras while offering obeisances
Receive guidance from respective ISCKON spiritual authorities (çikñä gurus)
Complete ISKCON Disciple Course
Dékñä & Çikñä Guru-pädäçraya
After a minimum of six months of following the above, one may select an ISKCON authorized
dékñä guru, from amongst ones established çikñä gurus. Note that six months is the minimum
period, and one may take as much time as required to make this selection.
Responsibility of candidates to choose guru by the exercise of their own intelligence.
Notify the local Temple President or relevant authority
Take written examination issued by ISKCON authority
Receive formal letter of recommendation from ISKCON authority
Receive permission from the selected guru
Begin to worship that guru and chant his pranama-mantra (followed by at least the first of
Çréla Prabhupäda’s pranama mantras)
In addition to taking instruction from ones selected dékñä guru, one continues to take
instruction from ones established çikñä gurus.
Communicate to guru and local authorities if one decides to aspire for initiation from another
ISKCON guru.
Hari-näma Initiation
After a subsequent minimum of six months, one may accept Vaiñëava dékñä.
The guru is under no obligation to initiate a candidate.
After initiation one may accept additional çikñä gurus, with the permission of one’s dékñä guru.
Personal Behavior and Preaching
äcära’, ‘pracära’,—nämera karaha ‘dui’ kärya
tumi—sarva-guru, tumi jagatera ärya
“You simultaneously perform both duties in relation to the holy name by your personal behavior
and by your preaching. Therefore you are the spiritual master of the entire world, for you are
the most advanced devotee in the world.”
Purport: Sanätana Gosvämé clearly defines herein the bona fide spiritual master of the world.
The qualifications expressed in this connection are that one must act according to the scriptural
injunctions and at the same time preach. One who does so is a bona fide spiritual master.
Çré Caitanya-caritämåta Antya 4.103
From any äçrama
kibä vipra, kibä nyäsé, çüdra kene naya
yei kåñëa-tattva-vettä, sei ‘guru’ haya
Whether one is a brähmaëa, a sannyäsé or a çüdra—regardless of what he is—he can become
a spiritual master if he knows the science of Kåñëa.
Çré Caitanya-caritämåta Madhya 8.128
Every one of you become the spiritual master
ämära äjïäya guru haïä tära' ei deça
yäre dekha, täre kaha 'kåñëa'-upadeça
Çré Caitanya-caritämåta. Madhya 7.128
Lord Caitanya says that "Every one of you become the spiritual master, every one of you. Why
one, two? Every one of you." "Oh, spiritual master is very difficult job." No. No difficult job.
Caitanya Mahä... Ämära äjïäya: "Just try to carry out My order. That's all. Then you become
spiritual master."
Bhagavad-gétä 4.1-2 -- Columbus, May 9, 1969
"On My order." That is the crucial point.
So how everyone can become a spiritual master? A spiritual master must have sufficient
knowledge, so many other qualifications. No. Even without any qualifications, one can become
a spiritual master. How? Now the process is, Caitanya Mahäprabhu says, ämära äjïäya: "On
My order." That is the crucial point. One does not become spiritual master by his own whims.
That is not spiritual master. He must be ordered by superior authority. Then he's spiritual
master. Ämära äjïäya. Just like in our case. Our superior authority, our spiritual master, he
ordered me that "You just try to preach this gospel, whatever you have learned from me, in
English." So we have tried it. That's all. It is not that I am very much qualified. The only
qualification is that I have tried to execute the order of superior authority. That's all. This is the
secret of success.
Bhagavad-gétä 2.2, London, Aug 3, 1973
S ELECTION OF G URU
We should not accept a guru suddenly out of fanaticism. That is very dangerous
The sästras enjoin that before we take a guru we study him carefully to find out whether we can
surrender to him. We should not accept a guru suddenly out of fanaticism. That is very
dangerous. The guru should also study the person who wants to become a disciple to see if he
is fit. That is the way a relationship is established between the guru and disciple…
Science of Self Realization 2a: What Is a Guru?
Meet together at least for one year…
In Hari-bhakti-viläsa by Sanätana Gosvämé it is directed that the spiritual master and the
disciple must meet together at least for one year so that the disciple may also understand that
"Here is a person whom I can accept as my guru," and the guru also can see that "Here is a
person who is fit for becoming my disciple." Then the business is nice.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam 1.16.25 -- Hawaii, January 21, 1974
One must hear him at least for one year
So therefore the process is before accepting a guru, one must hear him at least for one year.
And when he's convinced that "Here is actually a guru who can teach me," then you accept
him, guru. Don't accept whimsically.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam 1.16.25 -- Hawaii, January 21, 1974
One must not bring upon himself the calamity of having to reject his spiritual master.
The scriptures recommend that both the spiritual master and the disciple place each other
under strict scrutiny before mutual acceptance….Since even ordinary household items are
tested before acquisition, it is only an unfortunate fool who will fail to go through a testing period
in the selection of his true spiritual master, who is the best friend of the living entities. …The
point is that one must not bring upon himself the calamity of having to reject his spiritual
master. If one is prudent, he can avoid such a situation
Harinäma Cintamani—6
One should not accept a spiritual master in terms of social conventions…
It is imperative that a serious person accept a bona fide spiritual master in terms of the çästric
injunctions. Çré Jéva Gosvämé advises that one not accept a spiritual master in terms of
hereditary or customary social and ecclesiastical conventions. One should simply try to find a
genuinely qualified spiritual master for actual advancement in spiritual understanding.
Caitanya-caritämåta, Adi 1.35 purport
Correctly choose, by the exercise of their own intelligence…
It is the personal responsibility of candidates for initiation to correctly choose, by the exercise of
their own intelligence, a particular devotee as spiritual master. Candidates for initiation should
accept initiation from a spiritual master only after developing firm and mature faith in that
devotee and in his ability to take them back to Godhead. Sadhu, shastra, and guru are the
authoritative references to apply in ascertaining the level of advancement of a devotee.
Receiving official ISKCON guru approval signifies that the devotee has successfully completed
the authorization process set forth in ISKCON law, and that in the judgment of certain senior
devotees the candidate measures up to the standards and guidelines given in ISKCON law.
However, such approval is not automatically to be taken as a statement about the degree of
God-realization of the approved guru, and it is not intended to replace the intelligent
discrimination of the candidate.
ISKCON Law 7.2 Responsibility of Candidate for Initiation
Additional Quotes
Lesson 6
Selection of Guru
tasmäd guruà prapadyeta jijïäsuù çreya uttamam
çäbde pare ca niñëätaà brahmaëy upaçamäçrayam
Therefore any person who seriously desires real happiness must seek a bona fide spiritual
master and take shelter of him by initiation. The qualification of the bona fide guru is that he has
realized the conclusions of the scriptures by deliberation and is able to convince others of these
conclusions. Such great personalities, who have taken shelter of the Supreme Godhead,
leaving aside all material considerations, should be understood to be bona fide spiritual master
Çrémad-Bhägavatam 11.3.21
S ELECTION OF G URU
A disciple should be careful to accept an uttama-adhikäré as a spiritual master.
When a person realizes himself to be an eternal servitor of Kåñëa, he loses interest in
everything but Kåñëa's service. Always thinking of Kåñëa, devising means by which to spread
the holy name of Kåñëa, he understands that his only business is in spreading the Kåñëa
consciousness movement all over the world. Such a person is to be recognized as an uttamaadhikäré, and his association should be immediately accepted according to the six processes
(dadäti pratigåhëäti, etc.). Indeed, the advanced uttama-adhikäré Vaiñëava devotee should be
accepted as a spiritual master. Everything one possesses should be offered to him, for it is
enjoined that one should deliver whatever he has to the spiritual master…
Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura has given some practical hints to the effect that an uttama-adhikäré
Vaiñëava can be recognized by his ability to convert many fallen souls to Vaiñëavism.
….In this verse Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé advises the devotee to be intelligent enough to distinguish
between the kaniñöha-adhikäré, madhyama-adhikäré and uttama-adhikäré…..One should not
become a spiritual master unless he has attained the platform of uttama-adhikäré. A neophyte
Vaiñëava or a Vaiñëava situated on the intermediate platform can also accept disciples, but
such disciples must be on the same platform, and it should be understood that they cannot
advance very well toward the ultimate goal of life under his insufficient guidance. Therefore a
disciple should be careful to accept an uttama-adhikäré as a spiritual master.
Upadeçämåta Verse 5 Purport
You don't require large definition, what is guru
You don't require large definition, what is guru. So Vedic knowledge gives you indication that
tad-vijïänärtham. If you want to know the science of spiritual life, tad-vijïänärthaà sa gurum
eva abhigacchet [MU 1.2.12], you must approach guru. And who is guru? Guru means who is
the faithful servant of God. Very simple.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam 6.1.26-27, Philadelphia, July 12th, 1975
Lesson 7
Initiation Vows
Lesson Topics
Qualities of a Disciple
Strictly Following Initiation Vows
Challenges Faced Following Initiation Vows
Solutions to Challenges
Steps of Rectification
Qualities of a Disciple
The servant or disciple of the spiritual master should be free from false prestige, never
considering himself to be the doer. He should feel enmity toward no one, should be active and
never lazy, and should give up all sense of proprietorship over the objects of the senses,
including his wife, children, home and society. He should be endowed with feelings of loving
friendship toward the spiritual master and should never become deviated or bewildered. The
servant or disciple should always desire advancement in spiritual understanding, should not
envy anyone and should always avoid useless conversation.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 11.10.6
Importance of following Initiation Vows
Çrémad-Bhägavatam1.17.24
I cannot give you protection. That is not possible.
It is not very difficult to follow the four regulative principles…These things should be stopped if
you'll want to be serious; otherwise make a farce and do whatever you like. I cannot give you
protection. That is not possible. So you must have to follow these rules and regulation if you are
serious. Then take initiation. Otherwise don't make farce, don't make farce. That is my request.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam 1.16.35 -- Hawaii, January 28, 1974
Otherwise they are not my disciples
My advice is always chant 16 rounds minimum and follow the four regulative principles. All of
my disciples must agree on this point otherwise they are not my disciples…My disciples must
follow these principles living either in heaven or hell.
Letter to: Raja Laksmi — Mayapur 17 February, 1976
Solutions to Challenges
Write, in the box below, some helpful solutions to challenges faced in strictly
following initiation vows.
Tapasya for forcing you to make very rapid advancement in Krsna conscious
If still you are unable to fulfill that promise to your spiritual master, then what is the use of
calling yourself devotee and disciple? That is simply pretending. So you should think like this,
that I have promised my spiritual master this, now I must obey him without any exception,
otherwise I have no business calling myself his disciple. That will be your austerity or tapasya
for forcing you to make very rapid advancement in Krsna conscious understanding. Without
tapasya there is no question of making advancement. … You must avoid these four basic
principle restrictions under all circumstances, without any exceptions. Of course once, twice,
Krsna may excuse, that is not very difficult, but more than that it will become very difficult for
Krsna to excuse you and there is great risk that everything will be lost despite all of your time
and effort spent.
Letter to: Sankarasana — Bombay 31 December, 1972
Defying means to disconnect the relationship with the Spiritual Master.
You have asked if it is true that the Spiritual Master remains in the material universe until all of
His disciples are transferred to the Spiritual Sky. The answer is yes, this is the rule. Therefore,
every student should be very much careful not to commit any offense which will be detrimental
to this promotion to the Spiritual Kingdom, and thereby the Spiritual Master has to incarnate
again to deliver him. This sort of mentality will be a kind of offense to the Spiritual Master. Out
of the ten kinds of offenses, the number one offense is to disobey the orders of the Spiritual
Master. The instructions given to the disciple by the Spiritual Master at the time of initiation
should be strictly followed. That will make one advance to the spiritual path. But if one
deliberately defies such instructions, then his advancement is hampered from the very
beginning. This defying means to disconnect the relationship with the Spiritual Master. And
anyone who defies and therefore disconnects the relationship with the Spiritual Master can
hardly expect the assistance of the Spiritual Master life after life. I hope this will clear up this
question sufficiently for you.
Letter to: Jayapataka — Los Angeles 11 July, 1969
Additional Quotes
Lesson 7
Initiation Vows
If I pour water on it, then it will be difficult to ignite ….
Of course, this chanting of hari-näma will make you purified. That's nice. But just like this fire I
am going to ignite. This is dry firewood. But if I help it, to keep it dry, then the fire will be very
nice, blazing fire. But if I pour water on it, then it will be difficult to ignite. Similarly, the fire of
Kåñëa consciousness will keep you always progressing, but at the same time, if we also
voluntarily do not pour water on that fire, then it will be nice. Similarly, Kåñëa consciousness or
chanting Hare Kåñëa will keep you progressive. At the same time, voluntarily, if you do not
commit all these nonsenses, then it will be very nice. And if you continue this water pouring,
then... Just like a man is taking medicine at the same time doing all nonsense. Then his
disease will not be cured, or may take very, very long time. So we should not be irresponsible in
that way because life is very short.
Initiation lecture San Francisco, 10th Mar, 1968
Lord Caitanya accepts all kinds of sinful persons on the one condition
When the Lord was invoking His Sudarçana cakra and Çréla Nityänanda Prabhu was imploring
Him to forgive the two brothers, both the brothers fell down at the lotus feet of the Lord and
begged His pardon for their gross behavior. The Lord was also asked by Nityänanda Prabhu to
accept these repenting souls, and the Lord agreed to accept them on one condition, that they
henceforward completely give up all their sinful activities and habits of debauchery. Both the
brothers agreed and promised to give up all their sinful habits, and the kind Lord accepted
them and did not again refer to their past misdeeds. This is the specific kindness of Lord
Caitanya. In this age no one can say that he is free from sin. It is impossible for anyone to say
this. But Lord Caitanya accepts all kinds of sinful persons on the one condition that they
promise not to indulge in sinful habits after being spiritually initiated by the bona fide spiritual
master ... in this Kali-yuga practically all people are of the quality of Jagäi and Mädhäi. If they
want to be relieved from the reactions of their misdeeds, they must take shelter of Lord
Caitanya Mahäprabhu and after spiritual initiation thus refrain from those things which are
prohibited in the çästras.
Introduction to Çrémad-Bhägavatam
Purifying process is already there in the heart of the devotee
According to the Vedas, there is a certain regulation that if one falls down from his exalted
position he has to undergo certain ritualistic processes to purify himself. But here there is no
such condition, because the purifying process is already there in the heart of the devotee, due
to his remembering the Supreme Personality of Godhead constantly. Therefore, the chanting of
Hare should be continued without stoppage.
Bhagavad-gétä 9.31
Then you are not even a gentleman, what to speak about devotee.
Hådayänanda: (translating) He wants to know if the greatest offense is to disobey the guru.
Prabhupäda: Yes, that is the first offense. Guror avajïä, çruti-çästra-nindanam. Çruti-çästranindanaà guror avajïä. If you accept guru and again disobey him, then what is your position?
You are not a gentleman. You promise before guru, before Kåñëa, before fire, that "I shall obey
your order; I shall execute this," and again you do not do this. Then you are not even a
gentleman, what to speak about devotee. This is common sense.
Bhagavad-gétä 2.11 Mexico, February 11, 1975
Unit 3:
Acting in Relationship with the Guru
Lesson 8
Guru-püjä
Regular Worship of Çréla Prabhupäda
The Importance of Guru-püjä
Formal Worship of ISKCON Gurus
Vyäsa-püjä
Lesson 9
Guru- sevä
Qualifications of a Disciple
Guru-sevä and Service to ISKCON
Meeting Obligations in a Balanced Manner
Lesson 10
Guru vapu and väëé-sevä
Methods of Guru Vapuù and Väëé-sevä
Importance of Guru Vapuù-sevä
Behaving Appropriately in the Presence of the Guru
Inquiring From Guru
Importance of Guru-väëé-sevä
Lesson 11
Guru-tyäga (Rejection of the Spiritual master)
Principles and Procedures of Guru-tyäga
Procedures of Lodging Complaints Concerning Guru
Re-initiation
Continuing to Practice Devotion Service, in ISKCON
Lesson 8
Guru-püjä
Lesson Topics
Regular Worship of Çréla Prabhupäda
The Importance of Guru-püjä
Formal Worship of ISKCON Gurus
Vyäsa-püjä
The Importance of Guru-püjä
säkñäd-dharitvena samasta-çästrair
uktas tathä bhävyata eva sadbhiù
The spiritual master is honored as much as the Supreme Lord because he is the most
confidential servitor of the Lord.
Çré Çré Gurv-añöaka Verse 7
ärädhanänäà sarveñäà viñëor ärädhanaà param
tasmät parataraà devi tadéyänäà samarcanam
“[Lord Çiva told the goddess Durgä:] ‘My dear Devé, although the Vedas recommend worship of
demigods, the worship of Lord Viñëu is topmost. However, above the worship of Lord Viñëu is
the rendering of service to Vaiñëavas, who are related to Lord Viñëu.’
From Padma Puräëa, Caitanya-caritämåta, Madhya 11.31
ye me bhakta-janäù pärtha na me bhaktäç ca te janäù
mad-bhaktänäà ca ye bhaktäs te me bhakta-tamä matäù
“[Lord Kåñëa told Arjuna:] ‘Those who are My direct devotees are actually not My devotees, but
those who are the devotees of My servant are factually My devotees.’
From Ädi Puräëa, Caitanya-caritämåta, Madhya 11.28
It is not self aggrandizement; it is real teaching
So this guru-püjä which we are doing, it is not self aggrandizement; it is real teaching. You sing
daily, what is that? Guru-mukha-padma-väkya ära nä kariyä aikya . Bas, this is translation. I tell
you frankly, whatever little success is there in this Kåñëa consciousness movement, I simply
believed what was spoken by my Guru Mahäräja. You also continue that. Then every success
will come.
Arrival Address -- New York, July 9, 1976
List some of the benefits of regular Guru-püjä.
Formal Worship of ISKCON Gurus
Pranama mantras
After chanting the pranama mantra of their dékñä guru, all grand-disciples and future
generations should chant at least the first of Çréla Prabhupäda’s pranama mantras while
offering obeisances as a means of respecting the Founder-Acarya.
ISKCON Law 7.2.1
Offering ärätrika
While performing arati in the temple or at temple-related functions, a pujari may keep a small
picture of his or her dékñä guru on the arati tray or table instead of on the altar, provided the
dékñä guru is an ISKCON-approved guru in good standing. The picture of the dékñä guru should
be smaller in size than the picture of Çréla Prabhupäda on the altar and it shall be removed after
the arati.
ISKCON Law 6.4.8.3. a)
Guru-püjä (for current ISKCON Dékñä gurus)
The disciples of ISKCON gurus other than Çréla Prabhupäda may offer guru-püjä to their gurus
outside the temple room. The temple should provide facility for these disciples’ worship.
ISKCON Law 6.4.8.1.1
Restricted Titles
No one in ISKCON will be addressed publicly with the honorific title “His Divine Grace” nor be
addressed either publicly or privately by the honorifics ending in “-pada” or “-deva”. Disciples
may address their ISKCON dékñä or çikñä gurus as “Gurudeva” or “Guru-Maharaja”.
ISKCON Law 6.4.8.
Welcoming Vaisnavas
Events welcoming Vaisnavas, including those serving as gurus, to ISKCON temples should be
modest. For example, offering of a sitting place, offering of prasadam and something to drink,
presentation of a garland, and performance of kirtana.
ISKCON Law 6.4.8.2
Vyäsa-püjä
Note down some reflections about attending a Vyäsa-püjä ceremony below:
Vyasa-puja for ISKCON Current Dékñä and Çikñä Gurus
In order to focus more fully on Çréla Prabhupäda and every devotee's special relationship with
him, an ISKCON çikñä or dékñä guru may accept public guru-puja (arati and/or foot bathing) in
person once a year on ISKCON property on his or her Vyäsa-püjä. This celebration may be
held in the temple room. ISKCON members conducting Vyäsa-püjä ceremonies for ISKCON
gurus shall observe them in a modest way, significantly less elaborate than Çréla Prabhupäda’s
Vyäsa-püjä. In general, devotees shall observe these Vyäsa-püjä celebrations in their own
locales. In ISKCON, Vyäsa-püjä books may be published only for Çréla Prabhupäda.
ISKCON Law 6.4.8.1
Note
It generally considered a violation of Vaisnava etiquette for disciples to request the spiritual
master's godbrothers/godsisters to write an offering for, offer praise during, or participate in the
Vyäsa-püjä ceremony for their spiritual master.
Recommendation of GBC Guru Services Committee
Çréla Prabhupäda’s Vyäsa-püjä & Tirobhäva-tithi
ISKCON members shall celebrate Çréla Prabhupäda’s Vyäsa-püjä (&Tirobhäva) ceremony as
the preeminent Vyäsa-püjä (&Tirobhäva) ceremony in ISKCON. All ISKCON members are
requested to write an annual Vyäsa-püjä offering to Çréla Prabhupäda.
ISKCON Law 6.4.8
Additional Quotes
Lesson 8
Guru-püjä
Honor the picture of the Guru
There is no difference between me and my picture. Therefore we should honor and keep
pictures in that spirit. If we throw pictures this way and that way, that is offense. The name and
picture are as good as the person in spiritual world.
Letter to: Jadurani — New Vrindaban 4 September, 1972
Spiritual Master's Appearance Day is worshiped as Vyasa Puja
The ripened fruit is received hand to hand through disciplic succession and anyone who does
this work in disciplic succession from Çréla Vyasadeva is considered as representative of
Vyasadeva and as such the bona fide Spiritual Master's Appearance Day is worshiped as
Vyasa Puja. The exalted seat on which the Spiritual Master sits is also called Vyasasana.
Letter to: Bali-mardana — Tokyo 25 August, 1970
Not a single of the jewels or contribution the viceroy could touch…
So this Vyäsa-püjä means one day in a year, on the birthday of the spiritual master, because
he is representative of Vyäsa, he is delivering the same knowledge which has come down by
disciplic succession without any change, he is offered the respect. This is called Vyäsa-püjä.
And the spiritual master receives all honor, all contribution, on behalf of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, not for his person. Just like in our country when there was British rule,
there was a viceroy, a king's representative. So naturally, when viceroy used to go to some
meeting, many people used to present valuable jewels, valuable, because just to honor him.
But the law was that not a single of the jewels or contribution the viceroy could touch. It was
going to the royal treasury. The viceroy could accept on behalf of the king all contribution, but it
goes to the king. Similarly, this day, Vyäsa-püjä day, whatever honor, contribution and feelings
is being offered to the spiritual master, it is... Again, as we have received the knowledge from
upwards, similarly, this respect also goes from downward to the upward. This is the process.
So as the spiritual master is teacher of the student, he has to teach the disciple how to send
back his respect and contribution to God. This is called Vyäsa-püjä.
Çré Vyäsa-püjä -- New Vrindaban, September 2, 1972
The secret of Çré Vyäsa-püjä
Herein lies the secret of Çré Vyäsa-püjä. When we meditate on the transcendental pastimes of
the Absolute Godhead, we are proud to feel that we are His eternal servitors, and we become
jubilant and dance with joy. All glory to my divine master, for it is he who has out of his
unceasing flow of mercy stirred up within us such a movement of eternal existence. Let us bow
down at his lotus feet.
Çréla Prabhupäda Vyäsa-püjä
Homage to Çréla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Öhäkura, Bombay, February 1935.
Lesson 9
Guru-sevä
Lesson Topics:
Qualifications of a Disciple
Guru-sevä and Service to ISKCON
Meeting Obligations in a Balanced Manner
Sevayä
Just like if you purchase something, you must pay for it. Therefore it is called Sevayä. You
cannot pay by returning the value, which is taught by the spiritual master. That is not possible.
Therefore it is called Sevayä. Dedicate your life for his service. You cannot pay. What you have
got to pay to a spiritual master?
Çrémad-Bhägavatam 2.3.25 Los Angeles, June 23, 1972
Guru-sevä and Service to ISKCON
List in the table below:
Ways we can serve the mission of ISKCON?
Ways we can serve our guru?
Comment on the importance of a balanced approach to rendering guru-sevä and service to
the mission of ISKCON.
Meeting Obligations in a Balanced Manner
List some of the obligations I have in life, in addition to obligations to my guru:
Suggest solutions to challenges faced in fulfilling obligations to guru and others in a
balanced manner.
Duty of disciple to carry out order … spread Lord Caitanya’s message all over the world.
påthivéte äche yata nagarädi gräma
sarvatra pracära haibe mora näma
(Çré Caitanya-bhägavata Antya-khaëòa 4.126)
The devotees of Lord Caitanya must preach Kåñëa consciousness in every village and town in
the world. That will satisfy the Lord. It is not that one should act whimsically for his own
personal satisfaction. This order comes down through the paramparä system, and the spiritual
master presents these orders to the disciple so that he can spread the message of Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu. It is the duty of every disciple to carry out the order of the bona fide spiritual
master and spread Lord Caitanya’s message all over the world.
Çré Caitanya-caritämåta, Purport, Madhya-lélä 16.64
G URU - SEVÄ
tad viddhi praëipätena paripraçnena sevayä
upadekñyanti te jïänaà jïäninas tattva-darçinaù
Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire from him submissively and
render service unto him. The self-realized souls can impart knowledge unto you because they
have seen the truth.
Such a spiritual master should be accepted in full surrender, and one should serve the spiritual
master like a menial servant, without false prestige. Satisfaction of the self-realized spiritual
master is the secret of advancement in spiritual life.
Bhagavad-gétä As It Is 4.34
If there is no surrendering, then it is no advancement
Our movement is that beginning of spiritual life is to surrender. If there is no surrendering, then
it is no advance. Sarva-dharmän parityajya mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja [Bg. 18.66]. This is the
beginning. If that thing is lacking, there is no beginning even, what to speak of advancement.
That is discussed already. Na siddhià sa aväpnoti na sukhaà na paraà gatiù. This is the
beginning of spiritual life. The word is called disciple. Disciple means who accept discipline. If
there is no discipline, where is disciple?
Room Conversation—July 1st 1974, Melbourne
One must strictly try to execute the order.
The principle of very rigidly carrying out the order of the spiritual master must be observed. The
spiritual master gives different orders to different people. For example, Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu ordered Jéva Gosvämé, Rüpa Gosvämé and Sanätana Gosvämé to preach, and He
ordered Raghunätha däsa Gosvämé to strictly follow the rules and regulations of the renounced
order. All six Gosvämés strictly followed the instructions of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. This is the
principle for progress in devotional service. After receiving an order from the spiritual master,
one must strictly try to execute the order. That is the way of success.
Çré Caitanya-caritämåta Antya 6.312
In this way the bhakti-latä shrivels up.
Giving up the regulative principles and living according to one’s whims is compared to a mad
elephant, which by force uproots the bhakti-latä and breaks it to pieces. In this way the bhaktilatä shrivels up. Such an offense is especially created when one disobeys the instructions of
the spiritual master. This is called guru-avajïä. The devotee must therefore be very careful not
to commit offenses against the spiritual master by disobeying his instructions. As soon as one
is deviated from the instructions of the spiritual master, the uprooting of the bhakti-latä begins,
and gradually all the leaves dry up.
Çré Caitanya-caritämåta, Madhya 19.156
The order of the spiritual master is the life substance of the disciple.
After being initiated and receiving the orders of the spiritual master, the disciple should
unhesitatingly think about the instructions or orders of the spiritual master and should not allow
himself to be disturbed by anything else. This is also the verdict of Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura, who, while explaining a verse of Bhagavad-gétä (vyavasäyätmikä buddhir ekeha kurunandana, Bhagavad-gétä As It Is 2.41), points out that the order of the spiritual master is the
life substance of the disciple. The disciple shouldn't consider whether he is going back home,
back to Godhead; his first business should be to execute the order of the spiritual master. Thus
a disciple should always meditate on the order of the spiritual master, and that is perfectional
meditation. Not only should he meditate upon that order, but he should find out the means by
which he can perfectly worship and execute it.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam 4.24.15
Additional Quotes
Lesson 9
Guru- sevä
Disciple, which is related to the word discipline.
To accept a spiritual master means to voluntarily agree to abide by the rules and regulations
given by a great personality. This is what being a disciple means—to voluntarily agree, "Yes,
sir. Whatever you say, I accept." The Sanskrit word çiñya means "one who abides by the rules,"
and in English there is the word disciple, which is related to the word discipline. So a disciple
becomes disciplined by the spiritual master. "Even at the inconvenience of my personal
comfort, I must abide by the orders of my spiritual master."
lecture 5.5.1-Tittenhurst, London, 12th Sep, 1969
Take shelter of a bona fide spiritual master and to serve him with heart and soul.
For spiritual achievement the easiest path is to take shelter of a bona fide spiritual master and
to serve him with heart and soul. That is the secret of success. As stated by Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura in his eight stanzas of prayer to the spiritual master, yasya prasädäd
bhagavat-prasädaù. By serving or receiving the grace of the spiritual master, one receives the
grace of the Supreme Lord. By serving her devotee-husband, Kardama Muni, Devahüti shared
in his achievements. Similarly, a sincere disciple, simply by serving a bona fide spiritual master,
can achieve all the mercy of the Lord and the spiritual master simultaneously.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam 3.23.7
Stick to the principle of following the words of the spiritual master
If a disciple is very serious to execute the mission of the spiritual master, he immediately
associates with the Supreme Personality of Godhead by väëé or vapuù. This is the only secret
of success in seeing the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Instead of being eager to see the
Lord in some bush of Våndävana while at the same time engaging in sense gratification, if one
instead sticks to the principle of following the words of the spiritual master, he will see the
Supreme Lord without difficulty.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam 4.28.51
When you are helping my missionary activities ….That is real association.
You write that you have desire to avail of my association again, but why do you forget that you
are always in association with me? When you are helping my missionary activities I am always
thinking of you and you are always thinking of me. That is real association.
Letter to: Govinda — Los Angeles 17 August, 1969
I am with you as My Guru Maharaja is with me
The Spiritual Master is present wherever his sincere disciple is trying to serve his instructions.
This is possible by the Mercy of Krsna. In your attempts to serve me and in all your sincere
devotional sentiments I am with you as My Guru Maharaja is with me. Remember this always.
Letter to: Bhakta Don — Los Angeles 1 December, 1973
Lesson 10
Guru Vapuù and Väëé-sevä
Lesson Topics:
Methods of Guru Vapuù and Väëé-sevä
Importance of Guru Vapuù-sevä
Behaving Appropriately in the Presence of the Guru
Inquiring From Guru
Importance of Guru-väëé-sevä
Vapuù
Physical Body
Väëé
Instructions
sädhu-saìga’, ‘sädhu-saìga’—sarva-çästre kaya
lava-mätra sädhu-saìge sarva-siddhi haya
The verdict of all revealed scriptures is that by even a moment’s association with a pure
devotee, one can attain all success.
Çré Caitanya-caritämåta, Madhya 22.54
Behaving Appropriately in the Presence of the Guru
Rules of Etiquette for a Disciple from Hari-bhakti-viläsa
• He should fall down like an uprooted tree (däëòavät) on seeing the spiritual master.
• When guru approaches he should face him and when he leaves, he should follow him.
• He should not leave the spiritual master's presence without asking permission.
• He should not utter the spiritual master's name inattentively, but always with respect.
• He should not imitate the gait, activities or voice of the spiritual master.
• He should always hold the spiritual master's words in great respect.
• Though he may be punished by the spiritual master, he should not take it unkindly.
• He should not bear to hear criticism of the spiritual master, the scriptures or the Lord, but
should leave the place immediately.
• He should not step on the spiritual master's garland, bed, shoes, asana, shadow or table.
• He should not spread his legs before the spiritual master, nor should he yawn, laugh or
make disrespectful noises before him.
• He should not sit on an äsana or bed before the spiritual master.
• He should not worship others in preference to the spiritual master.
• He should not give dikña, scriptural explanations or show superiority in front of the guru.
• He should not give orders to the spiritual master, but always obey him.
• He should treat the spiritual master's spiritual master with similar respect.
• He should treat the wife, son and relatives of the spiritual master as the spiritual master, but
he should not clean the body of the son, take his remnants or wash his feet.
Qualifications of a Bona Fide Disciple from Hari-bhakti-viläsa (from Païcarätra-Pradépa)
G URU VAPUÙ - SEVÄ
Personally serve the spiritual master by giving him bodily comforts..
The words guru-çuçrüñayä mean that one should personally serve the spiritual master by
giving him bodily comforts, helping him in bathing, dressing, sleeping, eating and so on. This is
called guru-çuçrüñaëam. A disciple should serve the spiritual master as a menial servant, and
whatever he has in his possession should be dedicated to the spiritual master.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam 7.7.30-31
As hard as a thunderbolt and as soft as a rose
An äcärya, or great personality of the Vaiñëava school, is very strict in his principles, but
although he is as hard as a thunderbolt, sometimes he is as soft as a rose. Thus actually he is
independent.
Çré Caitanya-caritämåta, Ädi 7.55
çreyas tu guruvad-våttir nityam eva samäcaret
guru-putreñu däreñu guroç caiva sva-bandhuñu
To the spiritual master's children, wife, and relatives the disciple should offer the same kind of
respectful treatment he offers to the spiritual master himself.
Qualifications of a Bona Fide Disciple from Hari-bhakti-viläsa,
Family members of the spiritual master consider him an ordinary human being..
If someone considers the Supreme Personality—Kåñëa or Lord Rämacandra—to be an
ordinary human being, this does not mean that the Lord becomes an ordinary human being.
Similarly, if the family members of the spiritual master, who is the bona fide representative of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, consider the spiritual master an ordinary human being,
this does not mean that he becomes an ordinary human being. The spiritual master is as good
as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore one who is very serious about spiritual
advancement must regard the spiritual master in this way. Even a slight deviation from this
understanding can create disaster in the disciple's Vedic studies and austerities.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam 7.15.27
Respect one’s spiritual master’s Godbrothers
Çré Advaita Prabhu and Éçvara Puré, Lord Caitanya’s spiritual master, were both disciples of
Mädhavendra Puré, who was also the spiritual master of Nityänanda Prabhu. Thus Advaita
Prabhu, as Lord Caitanya’s spiritual uncle, was always to be respected because one should
respect one’s spiritual master’s Godbrothers as one respects one’s spiritual master.
Çré Caitanya-caritämåta, Ädi 5.147
It is the characteristic of a devotee to observe and protect the Vaiñëava etiquette
My dear Sanätana, although you are the deliverer of the entire universe and although even the
demigods and great saints are purified by touching you, it is the characteristic of a devotee to
observe and protect the Vaiñëava etiquette. Maintenance of the Vaiñëava etiquette is the
ornament of a devotee. If one transgresses the laws of etiquette, people make fun of him, and
thus he is vanquished in both this world and the next. By observing the etiquette, you have
satisfied My mind.
Çré Caitanya-caritämåta, Antya-lélä Ch 4, 129-133,
Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu to Sanätana Gosvämé
I NQUIRING F ROM G URU
This should not be done in a challenging spirit.
Those who listen to the Bhägavatam may put questions to the speaker in order to elicit the
clear meaning, but this should not be done in a challenging spirit. One must submit questions
with a great regard for the speaker and the subject matter. This is also the way recommended
in Bhagavad-gétä. One must learn the transcendental subject by submissive aural reception
from the right sources. Therefore these sages addressed the speaker Süta Gosvämé with great
respect.
SB 1.1.5
Inquiries one makes should strictly pertain to transcendental science
One must be jijïäsu, very much inquisitive to learn from the bona fide spiritual master. The
inquiries one makes should strictly pertain to transcendental science (jijïäsuù çreya uttamam).
The word uttamam refers to that which is above material knowledge. Tama means "the
darkness of this material world," and ut means "transcendental." Generally people are very
interested in inquiring about mundane subject matters, but when one has lost such interest and
is simply interested in transcendental subject matters, he is quite fit for being initiated.
Upadeçämåta: Verse 5
I MPORTANCE OF G URU - VÄËÉ - SEVÄ
Väëé continues to exist eternally.
Although according to material vision His Divine Grace Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté
Öhäkura Prabhupäda passed away from this material world on the last day of December, 1936,
I still consider His Divine Grace to be always present with me by his väëé, his words. There are
two ways of association-by väëé and by vapuù. Väëé means words, and vapuù means physical
presence. Physical presence is sometimes appreciable and sometimes not, but väëé continues
to exist eternally. Therefore we must take advantage of the väëé, not the physical presence.
The Bhagavad-gétä, for example, is the väëé of Lord Kåñëa. Although Kåñëa was personally
present five thousand years ago and is no longer physically present from the materialistic point
of view, the Bhagavad-gétä continues.
Caitanya-caritämåta, Antya Lila—Concluding Words
Vani is more important than vapu
To carry out the teachings of guru is more important than to worship the form, but none of them
should be neglected. Form is called vapu and teachings is called vani. Both should be
worshiped. Vani is more important than vapu.
Letter to: Tusta Krsna, Ahmedabad 14 December, 1972
The bug who is sitting on the lap of the king
So far personal association with the Guru is concerned, I was only with my Guru Maharaja four
or five times, but I have never left his association, not even for a moment. Because I am
following his instructions, I have never felt any separation. There are some of my Godbrothers
here in India who had constant personal association with Guru Maharaja, but who are
neglecting his orders. This is just like the bug who is sitting on the lap of the king. He may be
very puffed-up by his position, but all he can succeed in doing is biting the king. Personal
association is not so important as association through service.
Letter to: Satadhanya Calcutta 20 February, 1972
If you kindly try to fulfill my mission… that will be our constant association.
So far I am concerned, I do not factually feel any separation from my Spiritual Master because I
am trying to serve Him according to His desire. That should be the motto. If you kindly try to
fulfill my mission for which you have been sent there, that will be our constant association.
Letter to: Hamsaduta — Los Angeles 22 June, 1970
The feelings of separation will transform into transcendental bliss.
Please be happy in separation. I am separated from my Guru Maharaja since 1936 but I am
always with him so long I work according to his direction. So we should all work together for
satisfying Lord Krishna and in that way the feelings of separation will transform into
transcendental bliss.
Letter to: Uddhava — Boston 3 May, 1968
Lesson 11
Guru-tyäga (Rejection of the Spiritual Master)
Lesson Topics:
Principles of Guru-tyäga
Procedures of Lodging Concerns Regarding Guru
Re-initiation
Continuing to Practice Devotion Service, in ISKCON
Principles and Procedures of Guru-tyäga
A teacher who engages in an abominable action is fit to be abandoned
According to scriptural codes, a teacher who engages in an abominable action and has lost his
sense of discrimination is fit to be abandoned.
Bhagavad-gétä As It Is 2.5
Spiritual master is liable to be rejected if he proves himself unworthy
According to revealed scriptures, a teacher or spiritual master is liable to be rejected if he
proves himself unworthy of the position of a guru or spiritual master..
Çrémad-Bhägavatam 1.7.43
guror apy avaliptasya karyakaryam ajanatah
upatha-pratipannasya parityago vidhiyate
If the guru becomes attached to sense gratification, loses his sense of duty, and follows a
degraded path, a path other than devotional service to the Lord, he should be rejected.
Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva 179.25
By mistake you have come to a rascal … you can reject him
Even though somebody by mistake has gone to a rascal, the book is there. As soon as you find
out, "Here is a rascal who does not know anything about Kåñëa, and I have come to him," reject
him. That is stated in the çästra. Gurur apy avaliptasya käryäkäryam ajänantaù parityägo
vidhéyate.(?) Even by mistake you have come to a rascal who does not know how to become
guru, you can reject him. Why should you stick to him? Reject him.
Room Conversation -- January 31, 1977, Bhuvaneçvara
How does ISKCON protects disciples, in the case of a guru who proves himself unworthy
of the position? Write your comments below.
Procedures for Lodging Concerns Regarding Guru
A disciple may express concerns in relation to their guru in consultation with:
•
•
•
Temple and GBC authorities
Çikñä-gurus
ISKCON Resolve
If you give up the company of spiritual master, that is not good for you..
But when one leaves a spiritual master, the spiritual master, there may be some reason. That
reason is also given in the çästra, gurur api avaliptasya käryäkäryam ajänataù(?). Kärya
akärya. If the spiritual master does not know what is actually to be done, what is actually not to
be done, and he acts against the rules and regulations of the çästra, then such spiritual master
may be given up. But so long you do not find the spiritual master is doing against the principles
of çästra or guru, then if you give up the company of spiritual master, that is not good for you.
That is your downfall.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam 1.16.36 -- Tokyo, January 30, 1974
As long as your mantra guru is present, you cannot go elsewhere..
One day, Çréla Gadädhara Paëòita revealed to the Lord, his reason for wanting re-initiation. He
said, “I have revealed my iñöa-mantra (the mantra of one’s worshipable Deity) that I received
from my guru to an undeserving person and since then my mind is disturbed. My Lord, You
kindly reinitiate me with the same iñöa-mantra, then my mind will become jubilant again.”
The Lord replied, “Be very careful, that you do not commit any offences to your guru, the one
who instructed you on the iñöa-mantra. As long as your mantra guru is present, you cannot go
elsewhere, or even come to me. This would jeopardize the spiritual life of both you and Me.”
Çré Caitanya-bhägavata Antya-khaëòa Chapte10: Çré Puëòaréka Vidyänidhi Pastimes
bodhaù kaluñitas tena daurätmyaà prakaöé-kåtam
gurur yena parityaktas tena tyaktaù purä hariù
"One pollutes his own intelligence and exhibits severe weakness of character when he rejects
his own spiritual master. Indeed, such a person has already rejected the Supreme Lord, Hari."
Brahma-vaivarta Puräëa
Reinitiation
A devotee who, considering GBC guidelines on the subject of rejecting a guru and consulting
with senior ISKCON devotees, has decided to reject his non-bona fide guru, may seek initiation
from an approved ISKCON guru. Normal procedures as applicable in the case of first and
second initiations as described elsewhere in ISKCON law should be followed.
ISKCON Law 7.2.6
List ways a disciple can continue to be connected to Çréla Prabhupäda, the guru-paramparä
and ISKCON, in the case of Guru-tyäga, before being reinitiated.
Please always try to remember me by my teachings and we shall always be together
Please always try to remember me by my teachings and we shall always be together. Just like I
have written in the first publications of Çrémad-Bhagavatam, "The spiritual Master lives forever
by His divine instruction and the disciple lives with him.'', because I have always served my
Guru Maharaja and followed His teachings I am now even never separated from Him.
Letter to: Cidananda — Bhaktivedanta Manor 25 November, 1973
Unit Four:
Co-operatively Fulfilling the Relationship
& Consolidation
LESSON 12
PRESENTING ONE’S GURU
Presenting Çréla Prabhupäda
Presenting Present ISKCON Gurus
LESSON 13
RELATIONSHIPS WITHIN ISKCON
Discrimination on the Basis of Guru
Developing Cooperative Relationships
LESSON 14
COURSE ROUND UP
Lesson 12
Presenting One’s Guru
Lesson Topics
Presenting Çréla Prabhupäda
Presenting Current ISKCON Gurus
Presenting Çréla Prabhupäda
List, in the box below, some benefits of publicly promoting Çréla Prabhupäda as the
Founder-äcärya, and preeminent çikñä-guru in ISKCON, for our present and future.
Presenting Current ISKCON Gurus
List, in the box below, some inappropriate ways of presenting ISKCON present gurus
What might be possible consequences for ISKCON of inappropriately presenting ISKCON
gurus? Write your comments in the box below…
Additional Quotes
Lesson 12
Presenting One’s Guru
Instruct new members to take shelter of Çréla Prabhupäda
ISKCON Law 7.2.1 First (Harinama) Initiation
(See Page 30)
Use of Title
All ISKCON publications such as books, magazines, newsletters, leaflets, fliers, invitations,
etc., should clearly display the full name and titles of Çréla Prabhupäda including FounderÄcärya, Prabhupāda, and His Divine Grace, for example: “His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta
Swami Prabhupäda, Founder-Äcärya of the International Society for Krishna
Consciousness”.(96)
ISKCON Law 2.3.1
Plaques
All ISKCON temples and prominent buildings which do not already have Çréla Prabhupäda’s
name inscribed upon them, shall install plaques Çréla Prabhupäda’s full name and his position
as the Founder-Äcärya of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness.
This shall also apply to prominent buildings of the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, Bhaktivedanta
Institute and any other society founded by Çréla Prabhupäda or affiliated to ISKCON.
ISKCON Law 2.3.3
One should hide one's guru..
gopayed devatam istam gopayed gurum atmanah
gopayec ca nijam mantram gopayen nija-malikam
One should hide one's ista-deva, one should hide one's guru, one should hide one's mantra,
and one should hide one's japa-mala.
Hari-bhakti-vilasa, verse 2.147
Public display of guru t-shirts, posters, bead-bag buttons, etc.
Disciples of ISKCON dékñä and çikñä gurus should not wear or publicly display guru t-shirts,
posters, bead-bag buttons, athletic caps, etc. (other than Çréla Prabhupäda).
ISKCON Law/Recommendation 6.4.8 Worship and Etiquette
Photographs of ISKCON dékñä or çikñä gurus
ISKCON temple residents may keep photographs of ISKCON dékñä or çikñä gurus privately in
their ashram quarters but are not to display them publicly on ISKCON premises. Promoting
occasional special preaching events may be an exception.
ISKCON Law 6.4.8 Worship and Etiquette
Web sites prominently feature a picture of Çréla Prabhupäda
That ISKCON center officials shall be responsible to ensure that any and all web sites
published by the center prominently feature a picture of Çréla Prabhupäda on the introductory
page. This picture should be larger than any other individual’s photo (such as the GBC, center
President, or guru). Çréla Prabhupäda should be addressed by his formal name and title: “His
Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda, Founder-Acarya of the International
Society for Krishna Consciousness.
304. GBC Statement on the Position of Çréla Prabhupäda (March 2013)
Lesson 13
Relationships within ISKCON
Lesson Topics
Discrimination on the Basis of Guru
Developing Cooperative Relationships
Discrimination on the Basis of Guru
DISCRIMINATION
“The perceiving, noting, or making a distinction or difference between things.”
Oxford English Dictionary 2nd Edition, Oxford University Press
“Discrimination is the prejudicial treatment of an individual based solely on their
membership in a certain group or category…It involves excluding or restricting members
of one group from opportunities that are available to other groups.”
Introduction to sociology. 7th ed. New York: W. W. Norton & Company Inc, 2009. page 324.
Describe Iaam
time
ISKCON,
you experienced
discrimination
on the
so when,
pleasedinwith
your mutual
friendship thatinappropriate
I wish you all good
fortune
The Supreme
Personality
of Godhead said: My dear sons of the King, I am very
basis of your
dékñä or çikñä
gurus.
much pleased by the friendly relationships among you. All of you are engaged in
one occupation—devotional service. I am so pleased with your mutual friendship
that I wish you all good fortune. Now you may ask a benediction of Me.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam 4.30.8, The Lord speaking to the sons of King Präcénabarhiñat
Cooperate to keep this institution together after I am gone
"Your love for me," said Çréla Prabhupäda, "will be shown by how much you
cooperate to keep this institution together after I am gone."
Çréla Prabhupäda-lélämåta Volume 6, 52: "I Have Done My Part"
List some of the possible long term consequences, for ISKCON, arising from inappropriate
favoritism or bias on the basis of guru.
Developing Cooperative Relationships
Describe your vision of what ISKCON would be like, if devotees maintained positive &
cooperative relationships between all ISKCON gurus and disciples…
I am so pleased with your mutual friendship that I wish you all good fortune
The Lord said: My dear sons of the King, I am very much pleased by the friendly relationships
among you. All of you are engaged in one occupation—devotional service. I am so pleased
with your mutual friendship that I wish you all good fortune. Now you may ask a benediction of
Me.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam 4.30.8, The Lord speaking to the sons of King Präcénabarhiñat
Cooperate to keep this institution together after I am gone
"Your love for me," said Çréla Prabhupäda, "will be shown by how much you cooperate to keep
this institution together after I am gone."
Çréla Prabhupäda-lélämåta Volume 6, 52: "I Have Done My Part"
"United we stand; divided we fall."
Caitanya Mahäprabhu Himself wanted our cooperation. He is God, Kåñëa. And therefore
cooperation is very important thing. Nobody should think that "I have got so great ability. I can
do." No. It is simply by cooperation we can do very big thing. "United we stand; divided we fall."
This is our.... So be strong in pushing on Kåñëa consciousness, and Kåñëa will help. He is the
strongest. Still, we must be combined together.
Room Conversation With
Rädhä-Dämodara Saìkértana Party
March 16, 1976, Mayapur
What have you learnt from this course?
Appendixes
1. Additional Quotes
2. GBC Statement on the Position of Çréla Prabhupäda (March 2013)
3. Mandatory Qualifications of Dékñä-guru in ISKCON
4. Qualifications for Initiation in ISKCON
5. Standards of Conduct for Gurus
6. Rejection of a Fallen “Guru”
7. Harmonizing Lines of Authority Paper
8. G.B.C Resolution on ISKCON Disciple Course
9. Norms for Classroom Behavior
10. Further Reading
Appendix 1
Additional Quotes
Lesson 1 Welcome & Introduction
“We have only to execute the order of the spiritual master …”
We have only to execute the order of the spiritual master, preach Kåñëa consciousness and
follow in the path of the Vaiñëavas. The spiritual master represents both Lord Kåñëa and the
Vaiñëavas; therefore by following the instructions of the spiritual master and by chanting Hare
Kåñëa, everything will be all right.
Purport Çrémad-Bhägavatam 4.23.7
“There must be this training college ..”
As soon as one comes to me for becoming disciple, I place before him that "You have to give
up all these habits." When he agrees, then I accept him. And therefore I have got some
selected, trained-up men. So there must be this training college, institution, and proper training
according to the çästra. Then there is possibility of changing the whole situation.
Conversation with Governor -- April 20, 1975, Våndävana
Lesson 5 Guru-pädäçraya
yasya deve parä bhaktir yathä deve tathä gurau
tasyaite kathitä hy arthäù prakäçante mahätmanaù
"Unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord and the spiritual master, all the
imports of Vedic knowledge are automatically revealed."
Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 6.23
Offering should be made to the spiritual master with heart and soul…
A disciple should serve the spiritual master as a menial servant, and whatever he has in his
possession should be dedicated to the spiritual master. präëair arthair dhiyä väcä. Everyone
has his life, his wealth, his intelligence and his words, and all of them should be offered to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead through the via medium of the spiritual master. Everything
should be offered to the spiritual master as a matter of duty, but the offering should be made to
the spiritual master with heart and soul, not artificially to gain material prestige…
Çrémad-Bhägavatam 7.7.30-31
Take shelter of a bona fide spiritual master and to serve him with heart and soul.
For spiritual achievement the easiest path is to take shelter of a bona fide spiritual master and
to serve him with heart and soul. That is the secret of success. As stated by Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura in his eight stanzas of prayer to the spiritual master, yasya prasädäd
bhagavat-prasädaù. By serving or receiving the grace of the spiritual master, one receives the
grace of the Supreme Lord. By serving her devotee-husband, Kardama Muni, Devahüti shared
in his achievements. Similarly, a sincere disciple, simply by serving a bona fide spiritual master,
can achieve all the mercy of the Lord and the spiritual master simultaneously.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam 3.23.7
Lesson 7 Initiation Vows
Affection for the spiritual master and following the instructions of the Spiritual Master
You should understand that when you sat at the fire sacrifice upon your initiation, you made a
vow to the Spiritual Master at that time. So, you should not break these vows. You say that you
appreciate the association of devotees but how will you withstand the material attraction? If you
are not chanting Hare Krishna offenselessly and regularly? Affection for the spiritual master
and following the instructions of the Spiritual Master is the same. My instruction is that all of my
disciples must attend the mangala arati and chant 16 rounds daily.
This life is very flickering. At any moment you may die so we must cling very close to the
instruction of higher authorities, the spiritual master and Lord Krishna in Bhagavad-gita.
Letter to: Radha-Kanta — Vrindaban 20 August, 1974
This is tug of war
This is tug of war. So don't be afraid of mäyä. Simply enhance chanting and you'll be
conqueror. That's all. Näräyaëa-paräù sarve na kutaçcana bibhyati [SB 6.17.28]. We are not
afraid of mäyä because Kåñëa is there. Yes. Kåñëa says, kaunteya pratijänéhi na me bhaktaù
praëaçyati [Bg. 9.31]. You just declare, "My devotee will never be vanquished by mäyä." Mäyä
cannot do anything. Simply you have to become strong. And what is that strength? Chant Hare
Kåñëa Hare Kåñëa Kåñëa Kåñëa Hare Hare, loudly. Yes.
Bhagavad-gétä 3.6-10 -- Los Angeles, December 23, 1968
Lesson 12
Presenting One’s Guru
We are not instructing our disciples to chant my name
Just like, we are not instructing our disciples to chant my name "Bhaktivedanta Swami,
Bhaktivedanta Swami." No. They're chanting Hare Krishna. hari-tvena samasta-sastrair uktah "Guru is respected as good as Krishna." But that does not mean I shall teach them to go and
chant my name, "Bhaktivedanta Swami, Bhaktivedanta Swami, Bhaktivedanta Swami." What is
this? We are teaching, "Chant Hare Krishna." Harer nama, harer nama...
Çréla Prabhupäda morning walk, 29 March 1974, Bombay.
Repeatedly advertise that one is a devotee of Mahaprabhu
It is not enough to repeatedly advertise that one is a devotee of Mahaprabhu by saying, "I am
Gaura's! I am Gaura's!" Rather, those who follow the practices taught by Mahaprabhu are
understood to get the results of being the Lord's follower.
Çréla Jagadananda Pandit, Prema-vivarta 8.6
Lesson 14
Course Round Up
If transaction is perfect from both sides… then Kåñëa consciousness is very, very easy.
One must be serious to understand, and he must approach a qualified mahätmä guru. Then his
business will be, transaction will be very nicely done. This is Vedic process. … if the transaction
is perfect from both sides, from the disciple's side and guru's side, then Kåñëa consciousness is
very, very easy.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam 1.5.29, Våndävana, August 10, 1974
Appendix 2
GBC Statement on the Position of Çréla Prabhupäda
303. GBC Statement on the Position of Çréla Prabhupäda (March 2013)
Whereas there is a need to clarify within our society, via a succinct statement, Çréla
Prabhupäda’s preeminent position in relationship to dékñä and çikña gurus as well as all
ISKCON members, and to provide clarity on the function and position of dékñä and çikña gurus
in the ISKCON society:
RESOLVED:
That the GBC endorses the following statement:
As the Founder-Acarya of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness (ISKCON) and
the preeminent teacher and ultimate authority within our society, Çréla Prabhupäda has a
unique relationship with every ISKCON devotee. Lord Krishna, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, is the original guru whose Divine Grace descends through the medium of the guru
parampara. As such, a devotee is ultimately delivered by Sri Krishna acting through a
combination of various manifestations of His mercy. These include, but are not limited to, the
caitya guru, Çréla Prabhupäda, the guru parampara, one’s dékñä guru, other çikña gurus, the
Holy Name, sastra, and the nine processes of devotional service.
Within these cooperative elements, Çréla Prabhupäda, as the Founder-Acarya of the
International Society for Krishna Consciousness, is the preeminent çikñä-guru for all members
of ISKCON. All members of ISKCON, for all generations, are encouraged to seek shelter of
Çréla Prabhupäda. All members of ISKCON are entitled and encouraged to have a personal
relationship with Çréla Prabhupäda through his books, teachings, service, and his ISKCON
society.
All members accepting leadership roles within ISKCON, including dékñä gurus and çikña gurus,
have the duty of serving together under ISKCON’s Governing Body Commission (GBC) to fulfill
Çréla Prabhupäda’s instructions as he has given in his books, lectures, and personal
communications. Overall, the primary duty of all dékñä gurus, çikña gurus, and others in
leadership positions, is to assist Çréla Prabhupäda in his service to his Guru Maharaja
Çréla Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakur, and our Brahma Madhva Gaudiya Sampradaya. Those
who accept the service of dékñä guru or çikña guru in ISKCON are required to be exemplary in
representing Çréla Prabhupäda’s teaching in their words and personal behavior. The çikña guru
gives spiritual instruction and inspiration on behalf of Çréla Prabhupäda and our guru
parampara. The dékñä guru gives spiritual instruction, inspiration, formal initiation, a spiritual
name, and later imparts the sacred Gayatri mantras to a qualified disciple as a service to Çréla
Prabhupäda and our guru parampara.
Çréla Prabhupäda has clearly explained that devotees who are strictly following the Krsna
conscious principles are acting on the liberated platform, and, as such, are pure devotees,
even though they may actually not yet be liberated. (Such unalloyed devotional service is not
necessarily determined by one’s role or position of service, but by one’s realization.)
Those who accept the service of dékñä or çikña guru within ISKCON are mandated to be strict
followers of the instructions of Çréla Prabhupäda, and, as long as they follow, they are acting on
the liberated platform. Thus they may serve, as Çréla Prabhupäda ordered, as bona fide
representatives of the Lord and the guru parampara and be a via media of their mercy. Yet it
should be clearly understood that if such dékñä or çikña gurus deviate from strictly following,
they may fall down from their position. Thus, to act as a dékñä guru in ISKCON means to serve
under the GBC and in cooperation with other ISKCON authorities by functioning as a “regular
gurus” as Çréla Prabhupäda has directed.
This statement, while conclusive, is not exhaustive in its discussion of these principles. The
GBC may authorize additional statements and papers in the future to further explain the
preeminent position of our Founder-Acarya Çréla Prabhupäda, the role and responsibilities of
those who serve as gurus in our society, and the related duties of ISKCON members and
initiates.
RESOLVED:
All GBC members must distribute this resolution to all ISKCON temples, communities and
congregations via appropriate means of communication for the education of all ISKCON
members. This statement shall also be studied in ISKCON courses including introductory
courses, the ISKCON Disciple Course, the Spiritual Leadership Seminar: Being a Guru in
ISKCON, and other relevant venues. Reading this statement, and affirming it has been read
prior to initiation, shall be part of the test for all prospective initiates.
More details on these spiritual relationships and duties may be found in the official
“Harmonizing ISKCON’s Lines of Authority” Paper approved by the GBC in 2012.
304. Founder-Acarya Foremost on ISKCON Temple Websites (March 2013)
Whereas numerous websites of ISKCON temples currently do not prominently feature the
personality and teachings of His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda as the
Founder-Acarya of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness on their home page.
Many do not have a picture of Çréla Prabhupäda at all. Few of them have links to Çréla
Prabhupäda s books, tapes, & videos. Çréla Prabhupäda’s pre-eminent position as the
Founder-Acarya of ISKCON appears to have been de-emphasized on numerous ISKCON
temple websites. On certain sites, “ISKCON” or “Prabhupäda” only appear in the introductory
pages in a very small, faint font;Whereas currently, there is no requirement that determines
how Çréla Prabhupäda s photo and official title should be displayed on ISKCON center web
sites:
RESOLVED:
That ISKCON center officials shall be responsible to ensure that any and all web sites
published by the center prominently feature a picture of Çréla Prabhupäda on the introductory
page. This picture should be larger than any other individual’s photo (such as the GBC, center
President, or guru). Çréla Prabhupäda should be addressed by his formal name and title: “His
Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda, Founder-Acarya of the International
Society for Krishna Consciousness, or “ISKCON Founder-Acarya His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda”, or an equivalent translation.
All such web sites shall prominently display direct links that emphasize Çréla Prabhupäda on
their home page such that the casual viewer would have access on the home page to Çréla
Prabhupäda’s teachings and video recordings. The picture of Çréla Prabhupäda on the home
page, accompanied by his formal name and title, should be free from any other person’s image.
In other words, Çréla Prabhupäda s image should be the only personality in the photo or
likeness. The fonts presenting Çréla Prabhupäda’s name and title should be easily legible. All
ISKCON center web sites should adhere to this standard no later than three months (90 days)
from passage of this resolution.
305. “Harmonizing ISKCON’s Lines of Authority” Paper Required
Reading [ISKCON Law]
Whereas harmony between various authorities in ISKCON is required;
Whereas while initiating gurus are important spiritual authorities in the lives of devotees, other
ISKCON authorities also play an important role;
Whereas the GBC paper entitled “Harmonizing ISKCON's Lines of Authorities” explains how to
promote harmony in the services of gurus and other ISKCON
authorities.
RESOLVED:
That the official GBC paper entitled “Harmonizing ISKCON’s Lines of Authority” shall be
required reading for all prospective häriëama initiates before the initiation. This should be
verified both by the ISKCON authority who gives the recommendation for häriëama initiation as
well as by the initiating guru. Within three months, all GBC Zonal Secretaries shall:
• have the paper translated such that it is accessible to the devotees of their zone
• have the paper distributed to all approved initiating gurus, to all National Councils and
other regional bodies, and to temple presidents, congregational leaders, and other
officials in their zone
306. Amendment to Required Examination Prior to Accepting a Dékñäguru [ISKCON Law]
Whereas the GBC Statement on the Position of Çréla Prabhupäda and the paper “Harmonizing
ISKCON’s Lines of Authority” have been approved by the GBC and been made required
reading for all häriëama initiation candidates; Whereas it is also important to make sure that the
candidates have understood these papers; Whereas according to ISKCON law 7.2.1.1.6, every
häriëama initiation candidate must take a test before initiation. This test is a good opportunity to
make sure that the candidates have read these papers and to judge their level of
understanding of their important concepts:
RESOLVED:
(a) that ISKCON Law 7.2.1.1.6 be amended to include the following three questions in the test
that all häriëama initiation candidates must take before initiation:
14. Have you read the GBC Statement on the Position of Çréla Prabhupäda?
15. Have you read the paper “Harmonizing ISKCON’s Lines of Authority”
16. What have you understood as the most important points of “Harmonizing ISKCON’s Lines
of Authority” paper?
And (b), that the Guru Services Committee shall update the Initiation Exam accordingly for all
GBCs and gurus to distribute.
Appendix 3
Mandatory Qualifications of Dékñä-guru in ISKCON
ISKCON Law 6.2.1 GBC 2010 Resolutions
Must have been an initiated disciple for at least ten years.
Must have been strictly following the four regulative principles, regularly attending the morning
program, and chanting sixteen rounds daily, and have otherwise remained in good standing for
the previous ten years.
Must not exhibit tendencies toward behavior contrary to Vaisnava moral principles.
Must have excelled in preaching activities.
Must exhibit proficiency in knowledge and understanding of sastra.
Must preach without concoction and strictly according to the parampara, with sastric
knowledge grounded firmly in siddhanta, or conclusive truth.
Must be effective in practical preaching and counseling.
Must have no loyalties that compete with or compromise his loyalty to Çréla Prabhupäda, to his
teachings, and to ISKCON.
Must show understanding of and dedication to Çréla Prabhupäda’s mission with a strong
commitment to maintaining and increasing book distribution and other ISKCON projects.
Must recognize the GBC as the ultimate managing authority in ISKCON, support the GBC
system, and follow the GBC.
Should be engaged full-time in devotional service in an ISKCON center or other ISKCONapproved preaching program.
Within the previous ten years at a minimum, must not have engaged in serious criminal
activities or been responsible for:
A financial impropriety that put significant funds or other assets at risk
Risking legal consequences through the improper handling of funds and assets under his/her
control
Causing a loss of significant funds through unauthorized actions
Any other act of moral turpitude, as defined in the ecclesiastical discretion of the GBC, and/or
the legal jurisdiction in which the candidate resides
An additional requirement is attendance of the Guru Seminar.
Discretionary Qualifications:
Spiritual degrees – Bhakti Sastri, Bhakti Vaibhava, and Bhaktivedanta (when available) – shall
be a strongly recommended qualification for being granted no objection status to serve as a
guru in ISKCON.
Should be nothing in his character, conduct, or circumstances to give rise to doubt about his
ability to follow the code of conduct for gurus.
Should not be involved in any abnormal personal situation. An example of such a situation
would be a disrupted or anomalous family life which could distract a guru from his guru duties
or otherwise prove a disturbance to him or his followers.
4. Should always be responsible, conscientious, and honorable in ordinary dealings.
Appendix 4
Standards of Conduct for Gurus in ISKCON
ISKCON Law 6.4.3
Must always set the highest example for all devotees.
Must guide his disciples to follow Çréla Prabhupäda s instructions as taught and followed in
ISKCON.
Must protect and nourish the faith of all ISKCON devotees in their guru, in Çréla Prabhupäda,
and in Sri Krisna.
Must encourage newcomers’ faith in ISKCON and protect the faith of existing members.
Must not give initiation until the approval process has been fully completed.
Must not canvass for disciples.
Must allow all uninitiated devotees full freedom to exercise their right to accept initiation from
the guru of their choice.
Must allow uninitiated devotees who have preliminarily taken shelter of him the full freedom to
change their minds on their choice of initiating guru.
Since the guru-daksina received by an ISKCON guru is the property of ISKCON, it must be
used for the benefit of the Krishna consciousness movement. All guru-daksina must be kept in
a special account, preferably an ISKCON account, with at least two signatures, and accurate
account records must be kept.
It is prohibited to require a prospective disciple to make a minimum donation or other financial
commitment as a prerequisite to be accepted for initiation.
Gurus shall minimize the number of devotees engaged in their personal service and in their
traveling entourage. Gurus shall not personally engage single members of the opposite sex, or
married members of the opposite sex without their spouse, in direct personal service, and
should never be alone or in a solitary place with them as ordained by sastra.
6.4.3.2 Standards in Relation to the GBC Body
Must respect the GBC as Çréla Prabhupäda’s chosen successor as the ultimate managing
authority of ISKCON and maintain a respectful serving attitude towards the GBC.
As a guru in parampara from Çréla Prabhupäda, he must follow Çréla Prabhupäda in order to
work in ISKCON. Therefore, he must accept the GBC Body as his authority and follow the
directives of the GBC.
Must submit to any disciplinary sanctions imposed by the GBC Body, including not initiating
new disciples.
6.4.3.3 Standards in Relation to GBC Zonal Secretaries
Must act under the supervision of and in coordination with GBC Zonal Secretaries.
Must not change his residence without consulting the local GBC Zonal Secretary beforehand,
since such a move may affect the temples and devotees.
Must disclose financial records to the GBC Secretariat on an annual basis.
6.4.3.4 Standards in Relation to ISKCON Spiritual Authorities
Must cooperate with and be accountable to the local ISKCON authorities.
Must not initiate any devotee who has not received proper recommendation from the
appropriate ISKCON spiritual authority.
Must instruct disciples and other devotees to cooperate with ISKCON authorities and to follow
proper etiquette in case some disagreement arises.
Must maintain amicable working relationships with ISKCON authorities and not undermine
them in any way.
Since temple presidents and project leaders are fully responsible for engaging the devotees in
their charge, must not discuss changes in service, location or ashrama with a disciple without
first consulting the disciple’s local authority.
6.4.5 Sanctioning of Gurus by the GBC
The GBC Body may apply any of the following sanctions against a guru for misconduct.
6.4.5.1 Warning (or Censure)
If a guru is found deviating from or neglecting spiritual practices, but the deviation or negligence
is not very severe or habitual, or if a guru is transgressing the approved standards and
guidelines for guru behavior (such as canvassing for disciples, etc.) the guru should be warned
(or censured) confidentially.
6.4.5.2 Probation
If the warnings are not heeded, or if the deviation or neglect of spiritual practices are of a more
serious nature, or if the transgressions of guru codes of behavior are serious and habitual, the
guru may be put under probation with specific conditions which regulate his guru functions
(including temporary withdrawal of authorization to initiate new disciples). In addition he may be
given general recommendations or specific activities to perform as part of a program for his
rectification and eventual reinstatement.
6.4.5.3 Suspension
If a guru blatantly ignores the terms of probation, or repeatedly breaks one or more of the
regulative principles, or acts in a manner which seriously and harmfully disregards existing
ISKCON or GBC policies, or leaves his ashrama of sannyasa without authorization, or leaves
the association of devotees and the ISKCON movement, or completely deviates from standard
sadhana, he may be suspended. If a guru is suspended he cannot give initiation, nor maintain
an absolute shiksa position in relation with his disciples, nor be introduced as a spiritual master,
nor perform his guru functions such as receiving guru-puja or the acceptance of daksina.
6.4.5.4 Removal
If a guru becomes openly inimical to Çréla Prabhupäda or ISKCON; or otherwise acts
demonically; or becomes an impersonalist (mayavadi); or preaches the unauthorized
philosophy of apasampradaya groups against Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s principles; or
blatantly and consistently defies ISKCON and GBC policies; or if a guru’s attachment to sense
gratification is serious, prolonged, or hopeless, then, as per shastric injunction, he shall be
removed from his position as dékñä or shiksa-guru.
Appendix 5
Qualifications for Initiation in ISKCON (Relevant Excerpts)
7.2 RESPONSIBILITY OF CANDIDATE FOR INITIATION
It is the personal responsibility of candidates for initiation to correctly choose, by the exercise of
their own intelligence, a particular devotee as spiritual master. Candidates for initiation should
accept initiation from a spiritual master only after developing firm and mature faith in that
devotee and in his ability to take them back to Godhead. Sadhu, shastra, and guru are the
authoritative references to apply in ascertaining the level of advancement of a devotee.
Receiving official ISKCON guru approval signifies that the devotee has successfully completed
the authorization process set forth in ISKCON law, and that in the judgment of certain senior
devotees the candidate measures up to the standards and guidelines given in ISKCON law.
However, such approval is not automatically to be taken as a statement about the degree of
God-realization of the approved guru, and it is not intended to replace the intelligent
discrimination of the candidate.
1.1 One Year Preparatory Period
In order to receive first initiation one must have been engaged favorably in devotional service,
strictly following the four regulative principles and chanting sixteen rounds a day, for at least
one year without interruption.
ISKCON devotees shall instruct new members to take shelter of Çréla Prabhupäda and to
receive guidance, training and assistance from those who are practically and directly
instructing them in Krishna consciousness. ISKCON members shall choose when and from
whom they wish to request initiation. They must focus their attention on Çréla Prabhupäda as
the Founder-Acarya and as their preeminent çikñä guru.
After having established a solid relationship with His Divine Grace's vani, and after a minimum
of six months of strict sadhana, they may accept an authorized ISKCON devotee as a
prospective dékñä guru, and after a subsequent minimum of six months, accept vaisnava dékñä
from him or her. It should be understood that the purpose of çikñä and dékñä within ISKCON is
to strengthen the devotee’s relationship with Çréla Prabhupäda in terms of fidelity, attachment,
and affection.
Upon deciding from whom to take initiation, after receiving permission from that guru, and after
notifying the local Temple President or relevant authority, the candidate should begin to
worship that guru as his spiritual master, chanting his pranama-mantra. After chanting the
pranama mantra of their dékñä guru, all grand-disciples and future generations should chant at
least the first of Çréla Prabhupäda’s pranama mantras while offering obeisances as a means of
respecting the Founder-Acarya. Actual initiation may take place only after a minimum six-month
period from the date shelter was accepted by the prospective guru and the local Temple
President or relevant authority was notified.
1.4 Devotees Residing Within Temple Communities
In addition to satisfying the above requirements, devotees residing in temple communities must,
during the one-year preparatory period, regularly attend the full morning program. 1.5 Devotees
Residing Outside of Temple Communities Devotees who do not live in a temple community and
who cannot come daily to the temple programs may be initiated provided they have regular
morning programs at home or attend regular morning programs at the nama-hatta center.
1.6 Pass Examination
Before a devotee can be permitted to formally take shelter of a particular ISKCON spiritual
master and be subsequently recommended for initiation, he or she must demonstrate a basic
understanding of Çréla Prabhupäda’s teachings by answering an oral or written test
administered by the Temple President or other recommending authority.
In the event that a candidate for initiation who has formally accepted shelter from a spiritual
master subsequently decides to aspire for another ISKCON guru, this must be communicated
to both gurus as well as the local authorities. The continuous six month period required before
initiation would begin from the time of formal acceptance by the new guru.
Before a candidate can receive first initiation, the prospective guru must receive a formal
written recommendation from the appropriate ISKCON spiritual authority, as determined by the
candidate’s situation.
One-year Wait Between First and Second Initiation
To be qualified to receive second initiation, a first-initiated devotee must have been steadily
engaged in favorable devotional service, chanting sixteen rounds a day without fail, and strictly
following the four regulative principles for a period of at least one year from the time of
receiving first initiation. In addition, the candidate must have regularly attended a morning
program, whether in a temple, preaching center, nama-hatta center, or at home.
Two-year Wait for Those Who Fall Severely
A devotee who, after receiving first initiation, falls severely from the spiritual standard by
neglecting or forsaking his initiation vows in a serious way or by rejecting the association of
ISKCON devotees for a prolonged time, shall, after he returns to normal practice, be required
to wait for at least two years before being given second initiation.
Examination Option of Initiating Guru
It is the responsibility of the initiating guru to determine the fitness of his disciple for brahminical
initiation. To help do this, he may require his disciple to pass a suitable examination.
4.2.6 Formal Recommendation for Second Initiation
1. The guru of a candidate for second initiation must receive a written recommendation from
the appropriate ISKCON authority. The appropriate authority is determined in the same manner
as described above for first initiation.
7.2.4 Initiation Only from Approved Gurus
ISKCON members who in violation of ISKCON law take initiation from gurus who have not been
approved to initiate in ISKCON shall not be permitted to serve within ISKCON. If the nonapproved guru has an institution or ashrama outside ISKCON, then, according to standard
etiquette, his disciples should serve within the institution of their guru and should not serve
within ISKCON. (This rule does not apply to persons who were already initiated before they
became ISKCON members.)
However, the GBC Body also acknowledges that there may be exceptions to this general rule.
Ultimately, local ISKCON authorities have the right to determine whether or not a person may
live or serve in the centers under their jurisdiction. In respect to the above concerns, at their
discretion they may also choose to restrict a certain individual’s contact with ISKCON.
Prior Initiation by Non-Bona Fide Gurus
Persons who have taken initiation from non-bona fide gurus before becoming members of
ISKCON should follow the injunction of Çréla Jiva Gosvami that such a useless guru, a family
priest acting as guru, should be given up, and that the proper, bona fide guru should be
accepted.
7.3 Guidelines 7.3.1 Unauthorized “Initiation” Ceremonies
In cases where the formal guru-disciple relationship has not been properly sanctioned by
procedures given in ISKCON Law, no ISKCON member shall engage in giving any of the
elements of the initiation ceremony—such as giving a devotional name, giving sanctified
chanting beads, or neck beads, or participating in some ceremony or ritual of commitment -—
in any number or combination -- to other devotees in ISKCON or it’s congregations, with the
stated or unstated purpose or effect of creating the resemblance of a formal guru-disciple
relationship.
When such unauthorized activities have already taken place:
a. All participants should be informed that no initiation has taken place, nor has any binding
pledge leading towards initiation been made.
b. The junior devotee in the transaction should seek to establish a relationship with an
authorized initiating guru in whom he can place full faith.
All devotees must cease using any names given, if any.
8.2.1.5 Resident Devotees Normally Initiated in ISKCON
Devotees who live and work within ISKCON must be initiated in ISKCON except if someone
was previously initiated by a recognized sampradaya who afterwards wants to join and serve in
ISKCON under the approval and direction of the local GBC.
15.4.1 Initiation of Congregational Devotees
Congregational members shall be subject to the same standards for initiation as stated in
ISKCON Law on initiation and for acceptance of Guru. ISKCON Law states that the local
Temple or Regional Authorities must recommend the congregational candidate. However this
shall be done in the same manner as any other qualified devotee. If a local authority considers
a candidate for initiation not qualified, then the candidate should be informed what needs to be
done in order to become qualified according to ISKCON Law. It shall be prohibited to require a
minimum donation or financial commitment or other requirements not mentioned by Çréla
Prabhupäda or ISKCON Law. As already mentioned in ISKCON Law, an individual guru is
under no obligation to initiate a devotee because a proper recommendation has been given.
Appendix 6
Rejection of a Fallen “Guru” (ISKCON Laws)
N.B.: The following laws are based on Çré Kåñëa-bhajanämåta, by Çré Narahari Sarakära
Öhäkura (an associate of Çré Caitanya), Bhakti-sandarbha by Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, and Jaivadharma by Çréla Bhaktivinoda Thākura, in addition to the writings of Çréla A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda.
6.5.1.1 When a Fallen Guru May Be Rejected
If it is ascertained either by the admission of the guru, or by the testimony of irrefutably reliable
witness(es) that the guru was fallen at the time of initiation, then the disciple has a legitimate
reason to reject him and take re-initiation from a bona fide spiritual master.
6.5.1.2 When a Fallen Guru Must Be Rejected
6.5.1.2.1 Hopelessly Entangled in Sense Gratification
If a guru has become hopelessly entangled in sense gratification, and it has been established
by reliable testimony or by his own admissions that he has been regularly violating the
regulative principles of Krsna consciousness, and if there is virtually no hope for his
rectification, then the disciple should reject him and may accept re-initiation.
6.5.1.2.2 Takes on Demoniac Qualities
If the spiritual master takes on demoniac qualities and becomes inimical to ISKCON, he should
be rejected and the disciple may take re-initiation.
6.5.1.3 When Not to Reject a Fallen Guru
If a guru is engaged in sense gratification, violating one or more of the regulative principles, but
there is hope that he can be rectified, then his disciples should not reject him but should allow
time for such rectification to take place, and they should take shelter of Śrīla Prabhupāda and
senior Vaisnavas as śiksa-gurus.
6.5.1.4 When a Suspended Guru May Be Rejected
A disciple of a suspended guru who has severely lost his faith in his spiritual master, or who
has developed an offensive mentality towards him, and who is unable to regain his faith, even
after hearing many instructions in the matter, may take permission from the spiritual master for
release to accept a different initiating guru. The devotee should act in consultation with his local
GBC representative. If the suspended guru withholds his permission, then the disciple may
seek permission from the GBC Body.
6.5.1.5 “Guru Äçrayä” for Guidance
Devotees whose initiating spiritual master has fallen down should take guidance from the GBC
papers entitled “Guru Äçrayä” and “Questions and Answers About Reinitiation.” These papers
also present ISKCON’s guidelines on the importance of taking shelter of a spiritual master and
the role of śiksa-guru.
Appendix 7
Harmonizing ISKCON's Lines of Authority
Official GBC Policy Paper
This essay will focus exclusively on defining principles that should be followed by initiating or
instructing spiritual masters, disciples of initiating or instructing spiritual masters, Zonal GBCs,
Regional Secretaries, Temple Presidents, and other ISKCON-authorized managers. The aim is
to prevent misunderstandings between spiritual masters and managers, as well as to minimize
the influence these potential misunderstandings may have upon devotees under their combined
care.
"Spiritual Master" Means Dékñä, Çikñä, or Both
It should be noted that, from here on, unless specified, whenever we refer to "the spiritual
master" we mean both initiating spiritual masters and instructing spiritual masters (including
managers who act as such). Additionally, whenever we refer to "spiritual authorities" we mean
anyone (spiritual master or manager) whose instructions (çikñä) and example have formed the
foundation of a devotee’s faith in devotional service and who continues to build on that
foundation of the devotee's faith.
Authority Within ISKCON
This essay is not a detailed or definitive analysis of ISKCON’s management system, nor is it a
detailed analysis of guru-tattva—the requisite qualities and duties of a spiritual master and the
process of choosing a spiritual master.
The basic premise of this essay is as follows: Whether a devotee is an initiating spiritual
master, an instructing spiritual master, a sannyasi, a Governing Body Commissioner, a Zonal
Secretary, a Regional Secretary, a Temple President, a congregational leader, or anyone else
in a position of authority within ISKCON, the authority bestowed upon that devotee is complete
only if he or she follows Çréla Prabhupäda’s instruction to serve in ISKCON under the authority
of the GBC Body.
To establish this premise, we feel we need do no more than emphasize that His Divine Grace
consistently and clearly established this principle in his teachings, as well as within official
documents he himself signed. Çréla Prabhupäda thus clearly established the GBC as the
ultimate managing authority and also indicated that the GBC's jurisdiction includes the
responsibility to offer spiritual guidance (çikñä) to the whole of ISKCON, including all devotees
serving as spiritual masters:
Reporter: "Is there anyone who is designated to succeed you as the primary teacher of the
movement?"
Çréla Prabhupäda: "I am training some, I mean to say, advanced students so that they may very
easily take up the charge. I have made them GBC."1
In other words, although the GBC is the ultimate managing authority in ISKCON, the GBC's
duty is not only to manage but to teach.
Two Lines of Authority
Since every devotee accepts his or her spiritual inspiration from higher authorities, two lines of
authority, with their representatives, exist within ISKCON—one is seen as primarily spiritual,
while the other is seen as primarily managerial. Both lines of authority serve their own unique
yet interdependent purposes in submission to the orders of our Founder-Acarya. Both are
authorized by the GBC to give shelter to devotees under their care. This shelter is given
through both instruction and example.
By distinguishing the two lines of spiritual authority in these terms—as primarily spiritual or
primarily managerial—we are not suggesting that managerial authority is contrary to spiritual
authority. Nor are we suggesting that the spiritual line of authority is somehow more privileged
or intrinsically more pure.
"Management is also spiritual activity. . . . It is Krishna's establishment."2
"In our preaching work . . . we deal with so much property and money and so many books
bought and sold, but because these dealings all pertain to the Krsna consciousness movement,
they should never be considered material. That one is absorbed in thoughts of such
management does not mean that he is outside of Krsna consciousness. If one rigidly observes
the regulative principle of chanting sixteen rounds of the maha-mantra every day, his dealings
with the material world for the sake of spreading the Krsna consciousness movement are not
different from the spiritual cultivation of Krsna consciousness."3
In a spiritual society a manager cannot fulfill his or her duty to manage simply by declaring and
enforcing rules. The rules themselves must have a spiritual foundation, and their
implementation and enforcement must be applied in accordance with Vaisnava principles.
Managers who serve with this understanding will generally carry the full weight of spiritual
authority for those under their charge.
We should therefore see the oneness between "spiritual" and "managerial." But there is also
some difference, and understanding this simultaneous oneness and difference requires the use
of these two distinct terms with their explanations.
The Spiritual Line of Authority
The spiritual line of authority begins with Lord Krishna and continues to Brahma, Narada,
Vyasa, and the entire disciplic succession through Çréla Prabhupäda, our Founder-Acarya.
Room Conversation with Reporter, Los Angeles, June 4, 1976
Room Conversation, January 16, 1977, Calcutta
Srimad Bhagavatam, 5.16.3, purport
Those who are submissive to our sampradaya and who serve under the authority of the GBC
are authorized to give çikñä and shelter in this spiritual line, under the auspices of ISKCON.
This spiritual line can include Governing Body Commissioners, GBC Zonal Secretaries, spiritual
masters, sannyasis, Regional Secretaries, Temple Presidents, congregational leaders, and
both traveling and community preachers. In fact, anyone who strictly follows a bona fide
spiritual master, both by example and precept, can be authorized to represent the spiritual line
of authority.
Generally speaking, the most prominent spiritual authority is one’s initiating or instructing
spiritual master. The scriptures clearly say that devotees should obey and be loyal to their
spiritual masters. The spiritual masters thus exert authority over their disciples, and in so doing
the spiritual masters are able to train and educate their disciples in the development of bhakti.
The spiritual masters, therefore, assume a significant role in giving their disciples the spiritual
education and inspiration necessary to advance in Krishna consciousness.
The Managerial Line of Authority
In the managerial line of authority, and in accordance with Çréla Prabhupäda’s instructions, the
supervision of the Society and the enforcement of its rules proceed from the GBC. When we
use the word "authority" in the context of the managerial structure, we do not mean an
absolute, infallible authority—such as the authority of scripture—but the mandate to organize
the preaching movement so that it is aligned with the instructions of Çréla Prabhupäda. To carry
out that mandate, his followers have adapted ISKCON's managerial system, given by Çréla
Prabhupäda, to take into account the proliferation of temples, congregational devotees (who
are not temple residents), and projects like farms and gurukulas, as well as other favorable
organizations and entities. Thus, to better serve this expanding field and its members, this
structure presently includes various regional, national, and continental governing bodies
consisting of, but not limited to, Governing Body Commissioners, GBC Zonal Secretaries,
spiritual masters, sannyasis, Regional Secretaries, Temple Presidents, congregational leaders,
and both traveling and community preachers.
Defining the Point of Divergence
Although in an ideal world everything would work according to Çréla Prabhupäda’s vision for
ISKCON, we have seen tendencies from those in one line of authority to interfere with those in
the other line of authority.
For instance, there are spiritual authorities who sometimes interfere with competent and
responsible managers. They do not consider themselves part of the zonal managerial structure
where their preaching has influence (though they are in fact accountable to it), but they are still
either directly or indirectly managing some project(s) within that structure.
Therefore at times they manage devotees, money, and even projects that their followers and
dependents4 are responsible for, without a clear agreement with the managerial structure with
which they intersect. By so doing, they may inadvertently undermine the managerial line of
authority by encouraging their dependents to direct their service, and thus their loyalty, to their
spiritual authority's own management structure.
This scenario creates not only confusion but a spirit of separatism as well. Situations such as
these can also become points of contention for managers, although the more junior managers
often refrain from directly voicing their grievances because they feel intimidated out of fear of
committing offenses, especially to spiritual masters.
On the other hand, there are also managerial authorities who sometimes provide inadequate
spiritual care. This can fuel the spiritual master's inclination to intervene by suggesting an
alternative for his disciple's association or service.
For instance, managers may sometimes place greater importance on management goals than
on sadhana, preaching purely, or the development of purity in the devotional service of those
under their care. Managers may even neglect the spiritual development of those within their
jurisdiction who do not offer resources to help their managerial vision, even though said
managers may have done little to inspire help from them or to empower other authorities to do
the same.
Deference to the Managerial Line of Authority
The above-mentioned scenarios cause tension between the spiritual and the managerial lines
of authority.
Of course, it is understood that circumstances do arise where there are financially independent
devotees who have no managerial connection with locally organized sanghas. Still, it should not
be assumed that no effort is being made by local management structures to include every
devotee, or aspiring devotee, within their locally managed system of care for congregational
devotees.
Therefore, with respect to the service performed by ISKCON managers, a spiritual master
should always seek approval from the managers overseeing the area of jurisdiction in which his
disciples are living before suggesting a new sangha or service for them, or intervening in other
managerial decisions.
Best, of course, is to train the disciples to offer respect to their local managers right from the
start of the spiritual–master/disciple relationship. Many ISKCON managers are carrying out the
responsibility of maintaining the temples, Deities, book distribution, and other standards given
to us by Çréla Prabhupäda.
"Deity installation means regular worship without fail and for good."5
"Dependents" are not only those who are spiritually dependent. There are instances where
devotees are also financially dependent upon their spiritual authorities and are financially
maintained by the structures the spiritual authorities have themselves created.
Letter to Sivananda, 2 September 1971
Therefore spiritual masters should teach their disciples to serve Çréla Prabhupäda's mission by
cooperating with their local leaders and managers.
But this does not mean that a manager should assume that he or she has complete freedom to
ignore legitimate needs of those under his or her care or that he or she has the freedom to
ignore concerns expressed by spiritual masters who ask them to see that their disciples are
properly cared for. They should be sensitive to the concerns of the spiritual masters as well as
their disciples.
If the spiritual master still strongly feels that the level of care for his disciples within the local
management structure is inadequate, taking into account the level of commitment and
responsibilities being asked of them (his disciples), then he may appeal on their behalf to the
higher levels of management, the local GBC, or other ISKCON avenues of appeal, as listed
later in this paper.
More on this point will be addressed later. But before we do that, we will first briefly discuss the
topic of faith. Those in both lines of authority would be well served to consider the relevance of
faith to the broader issues being discussed here.
Authority Is Built on the Continuous Development of Faith
ISKCON’s greatest asset is the faith of its members. Even if there are no temples, no projects,
no income, and only a few followers, if there is faith, there will be prosperity, in the true sense of
the term. Consider what Çréla Prabhupäda has written in the following letter:
"There is a proverb in Sanskrit literature that enthusiastic persons achieve the favor of the
Goddess of Fortune. In the Western part of the world there is tangible example of this slogan.
People in this part of the world are very much enthusiastic in material advancement and they
have got it. Similarly, according to the instructions of Srila Rupa Goswami, if we become
enthusiastic in spiritual matters, then we also get success in that way. Take for example, I
came to your country in ripe old age, but I had one asset: enthusiasm and faith in my Spiritual
Master. I think these assets only are giving me some lights of hope, whatever I have achieved
so far with your cooperation."6
And in his purport to “Bhagavad-gita As It Is” 9.3, Çréla Prabhupäda writes: "Faith is the most
important factor for progress in Krishna consciousness. . . . It is only by faith that one can
advance in Krishna consciousness."
Those in the spiritual line of authority should preach and behave in such a way that they
nourish and protect their dependents' faith in pure devotional service, in our sampradaya, in
Çréla Prabhupäda, and in ISKCON, including its management. Spiritual masters also have the
added responsibility of nourishing and protecting ISKCON’s managers' faith that they (the
spiritual masters) are fit representatives of the spiritual line of authority. If the spiritual masters
act in a contrary way, they will erode the faith of others.
Letter to Jaya Govinda, Tittenhurst, 15 October 1969.
Conversely, those in the managerial line of authority should manage, preach, and behave in
such a way that they build and sustain the trust of those in the spiritual line of authority and
their disciples. By the managers showing genuine concern for the devotees under their care,
the spiritual masters will then naturally encourage their disciples to assist the manager in his
service. But if managers act in a way contrary to spiritual principles, in conflict with the spiritual
interests of those devotees for whom they are responsible, that will also erode others' faith.
Therefore, to safeguard the faith of all of ISKCON's members, it is necessary that we delineate
clear principles for both lines of authority to follow.
Spiritual Masters Are Not Independent
To further clarify the need to introduce well-defined principles, we will examine the position of
spiritual masters within the managerial structure of ISKCON.
When Çréla Prabhupäda was physically present, he was ISKCON’s sole initiating spiritual
master, its preeminent çikñä guru, and the supreme managerial authority, superior to the GBC:
"[…] we are managing our Krishna Consciousness Movement by the Governing Body
Commission, GBC. We have got about 20 GBC's looking after the whole world affair, and
above the GBC I am there. Below the GBC there are the temple president, secretary, treasurer
in every centre. So the temple president is responsible to the GBC and the GBC is responsible
to me. In this way we are managing.."7
In Çréla Prabhupäda’s physical absence the structure is now somewhat different. His Divine
Grace instructed that the GBC should be the ultimate managing authority for ISKCON. At the
same time he indicated that the Society should have multiple spiritual masters:
"Anyone following the order of Lord Caitanya under the guidance of His bona fide
representative can become a spiritual master, and I wish that in my absence all my disciples
become the bona fide spiritual master to spread Krishna Consciousness throughout the whole
world."8
This gives rise to a challenging situation. Many spiritual organizations have one spiritual master
operating as the sole head of the institution, whereas ISKCON has many spiritual masters
within one organization, in addition to a "governing body" that operates as the "ultimate
managing authority" for the institution as a whole. Those serving as spiritual masters in
ISKCON are meant to follow the instructions of Çréla Prabhupäda and work under the GBC
Body.
The spiritual masters are thus obligated to follow the Society's policies and codes of conduct,
including those outlined in this GBC-approved paper, and to abide by the decisions of its
management. Included within that obligation is the responsibility to inspire their disciples to
associate with and serve within ISKCON's already-existing managerial and devotee-care
Letter to: Vasudeva, New Vrindaban, 30 June, 1976
Letter to Madhusudana, Navadvipa, 2 November 1967.
sangas, located within their disciple's area of residence rather than only inspiring them to
associate with themselves (the spiritual masters) or with their sangas and projects that have no
connection with the ISKCON zonal management structure.
Disciples Should Avoid Creating Conflict Between Their Authorities
Disciples should also understand the greater picture within ISKCON. Certainly a spiritual
master may be more spiritually advanced than any given GBC member or any other ISKCON
manager (while there may also be cases where the local GBC or ISKCON manager may be
more spiritually advanced than a particular spiritual master).
Nevertheless, concerning the spiritual management of the Society, as we have already clearly
shown, Çréla Prabhupäda invested authority in the GBC and its individual members and in other
ISKCON managers.
If a disciple has the mistaken conviction that his or her spiritual master is above the GBC and
ISKCON’s laws and policies, that should be corrected by the spiritual master and other
authorities. Otherwise, that misconception may lead to actions which create conflict between
his or her spiritual and managerial authorities
Indeed, all disciples should follow their ISKCON authorities in the same way that all initiating
and instructing spiritual masters should follow their own authorities within ISKCON.
By both example and precept, therefore, all spiritual masters should not only educate and train
their disciples in the development of bhakti but should also educate and train them about their
relation to the managerial structure of ISKCON, as well as about the spiritual masters' own
relation to that structure.
Principles Being Introduced
E DUCATION OF GURU ' S DISCIPLES
It is the responsibility of the spiritual masters within ISKCON to help every one of their
disciples clearly understand the following:
1) The spiritual master draws his authority from his fidelity to Çréla Prabhupäda. This
includes fidelity to Çréla Prabhupäda's order to work within his mission, ISKCON.
2) The spiritual master is a member of ISKCON and, as such, is accountable to the
collective will of its leadership, the GBC Body.
3) The spiritual master does not derive any specific right or prerogative over ISKCON
resources simply by dint of his being a spiritual master. Moreover, the spiritual master
should not misuse his rights and prerogatives over his disciples.
4) The disciples should follow their ISKCON authorities in the same way that all initiating and
instructing spiritual masters set an example by following their own ISKCON authorities.
5) Disciples have the essential task of surrendering to Krishna through the spiritual master,
and included within this task is recognizing and respecting other superiors within ISKCON's
management who are helping them in their process of spiritual progress.
6) Spiritually mature managers may be the main çikñä gurus for devotees who are not their
initiated disciples, and such relationships are to be fully encouraged by the initiating spiritual
masters.
C ONDUCT OF GURUS
Moreover, to show respect toward the managerial line of authority and to help nurture and
protect managers' faith in the spiritual line of authority, every spiritual master should:
1) When first visiting or preferably before arriving at a recognized ISKCON temple or
preaching center, ask the local manager how he (the spiritual master) may serve that yatra
during his visit (rather than the spiritual master only pursuing his own agenda).
2) Before planning a visit to a zone or region where there is no local temple or preaching
center, first ask the Zonal GBC if there is a vision local leaders have for that place or region
which he (the spiritual master) could serve.
3) If there is a disagreement in terms of managerial decisions, do his best to cooperate with
the relevant authority. If no agreement can be reached, then the spiritual master should
defer to the decision of the relevant authority, with the option of appealing to higher
authorities if necessary.
D UTIES OF M ANAGERS
To build cooperation within ISKCON, show respect for the spiritual line of authority, and help
nurture and protect the faith of spiritual masters and their disciples in the managerial line of
authority, all managers should:
1) Be receptive to advice given by initiating spiritual masters and other itinerant preachers
visiting their area of jurisdiction, especially on matters concerning devotee care.
2) Protect the faith that their dependents have in pure devotional service and in the principle
of accepting and serving an initiating spiritual master and instructing spiritual masters.
3) Encourage and support a system of devotee care (i.e., counselor system, brahminical
advisory board, etc.) within their sphere of management.
4) Assure that the managers in their line of authority are themselves trained in the principles
of devotee care.
5) Inform visiting spiritual masters about the spiritual health and overall well-being of their
disciples.
6) Encourage and help visiting spiritual masters and other itinerant preachers to reach out to
those disciples who are in need and who would be most responsive to their help.
7) Insure that there is an equitable system for initiation recommendations which does not
condone unwarranted pressure or manipulation from the local management for managerial
gains.
Summary
To promote the full flourishing of devotees' spiritual lives, Çréla Prabhupäda created for
ISKCON a managerial structure with clear lines of authority. Every member of ISKCON should
respect this structure and learn to work within it. The goal of the managerial structure is
spiritual: to facilitate the spiritual advancement of ISKCON's members through association with
devotees, opportunities for service, and effective preaching strategies. Simultaneously,
ISKCON affirms the fundamental importance of accepting initiation from a bona fide spiritual
master.
Of paramount importance, of course, is our Founder-Acarya, Çréla Prabhupäda, who is the
initiating spiritual master of many devotees in ISKCON and the foremost instructing spiritual
master of every devotee, now and in the future. Also important are the many initiating and
instructing spiritual masters now serving in ISKCON.
All spiritual masters and their disciples should likewise appreciate the importance of the many
managers in our society, who help guide and train disciples and oversee the facilities ISKCON
provides for their spiritual advancement. All spiritual masters and their disciples should work
cooperatively within ISKCON’s managerial system, both to benefit themselves spiritually and to
help the Society flourish.
This cooperative, mutually respectful spirit is the best way to preserve the Society's unity,
please Çréla Prabhupäda, and expand the sankirtana mission.
In the mood of Lord Caitanya, Çréla Prabhupäda desired that the sankirtana movement be
spread all over the world, "to every town and village." He demonstrated that desire by his
constant traveling, writing, and speaking. He requested his disciples to open centers far and
wide, distribute his books, arrange for attractive festivals, distribute prasada, etc. It was Çréla
Prabhupäda's desire that ISKCON continue to expand, to rise as the benediction moon of Lord
Caitanya's mercy.
It is for this purpose that Çréla Prabhupäda established ISKCON as a spiritual institution with a
managerial structure. The purpose of this structure is to maintain the standards he established,
to offer shelter and spiritual nourishment to the devotees, and to support and increase the
sankirtana mission. To please Çréla Prabhupäda by delivering the mercy of Sri Sri Gaura-Nitai
to the conditioned souls, everyone within ISKCON—spiritual masters, disciples, and managers
alike—should work cooperatively within this structure.
Appendix 8
G.B.C Resolution on ISKCON Disciple Course
RESOLVED (March 2014):
That the ISKCON Disciple Course, as developed by the GBC Guru Services Committee, shall
be a mandatory pre-requisite for all devotees accepting first or second initiation by an ISKCON
guru, effective Janmastami, 2015. After that date, no guru may initiate a disciple who has not
first completed the Disciple Course. This is in addition to current requirements of new initiates.
Furthermore, all GBC Members and Temple Presidents shall ensure that within their respective
areas of authority, no later than Janmastami, 2015:
o
o
o
o
Devotees shall be advised and encouraged to complete the Disciple Course before
selecting a diksa-guru
Devotees shall have reasonable access to enroll in the Disciple Course
A sufficient number of teachers shall be identified and facilitated to teach the Course
No devotee shall be allowed to accept initiation before completing the Course
(subject to exemptions below)
Teachers/facilitators of the ISKCON Disciple Course must:
a. Beinitiated for at least 5 years
b. Have completed the ISKCON Disciple Course
c. Be recommended by their Disciple Course facilitator
d. Have completed the VTE Teacher Training Course 1 (TTC1)* or have equivalent training
or experience
e. Have the approval of their local GBC representative
f. Teach from the official curriculum, manuals and other materials as approved by the GBC
Guru Services Committee
Illiterate devotees are welcome to participate in the Course. Upon completion they shall be
required to undergo a minimal oral examination at the discretion of the teacher. In rare cases of
the infirmity or terminal illness of a prospective disciple the requirement for completing the
Disciple Course may be waived by the local Temple President.
GBC members who find a specific area within their jurisdiction needs more time for
implementation due to exceptional circumstances, may request an extension of up to one year
by submitting a request no later than July 31, 2015, to the GBC Executive Committee for
approval.
*An exemption for the requirement of the TTC1 may be granted by the local GBC Zonal Secretary based upon an
assessment of the potential teacher’s maturity and teaching skills. The Mayapur Institute shall provide to the
GBC a list of criteria by which such evaluations should be made.
Appendix 9
Principles for Creating a Diksa-guru System for ISKCON
ISKCON Position Paper, GBC Resolution 312 (March 2017)
This paper explains the authority of ISKCON’s Governing Body Commission (GBC) to create a
system for devotees to take up the service of diksa-guru within the society, focusing on the
principles behind the system.
Through many written and spoken instructions, Srila Prabhupada made it abundantly clear that after
his departure the GBC should serve as ISKCON’s ultimate managerial authority. In his will he
states:
1. The Governing Body Commission (GBC) will be the ultimate managing authority
of the entire International Society for Krishna Consciousness.
[LD 6: Declaration of Will, June 1977]
Although within the Vedic literature we may not find specific references describing a system of
management with Vaisnavas working under a central authority such as the GBC, Srila Prabhupada
created one. In doing so he followed the order of his Guru Maharaja,
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura, who requested his disciples to create a governing body.
The significance of this is discussed in Caitanya-caritamrta, Adi 12.8, purport:
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura, at the time of his departure, requested all his
disciples to form a governing body and conduct missionary activities cooperatively. He did
not instruct a particular man to become the next acarya. But just after his passing away, his
leading secretaries made plans, without authority, to occupy the post of acarya, and they
split into two factions over who the next acarya would be.
Similarly, in the Vedic scriptures we will not find directions for Vaisnava institutions to endorse or
authorize spiritual positions like sannyasa or diksa-guru. Our evidence for the legitimacy of the GBC
establishing such processes consists of Srila Prabhupada’s instructions and activities.
Concerning such important functions as approving sannyasa candidates, during his time with
us Srila Prabhupada gradually turned these over to the GBC. In ISKCON’s early years Srila
Prabhupada personally awarded sannyasa to those he thought qualified. Later he asked the GBC
Body to establish systems for assessing potential sannyasis:
For taking sannyasa you may consult your GBC member as we shall be starting a
new policy where the sannyasa candidate must meet certain requirements to be
determined by the GBC. [Letter to Danavir, 6 February 1973]
Your program for those who are desiring to take sannyasa is approved by me and I
request that you make something concrete and distribute it to all the other GBC
members and amongst yourselves you may decide who will take sannyasa.
[Letter to Satsvarupa, 10 February 1973]
Since Srila Prabhupada’s disappearance, the GBC Ministry for Sannyasa Services has developed
systems for assessing and training candidates for sannyasa and recommending them to the GBC
for the GBC’s final approval.
Just as Srila Prabhupada established that the qualifications of prospective sannyasis should be
assessed, he similarly indicated that diksa gurus should have certain qualifications.
Srila Prabhupada expected that after his physical departure his disciples would continue the
disciplic succession, serving as gurus and accepting disciples into the parampara. He stated this as
early as 1967:
Anyone following the order of Lord Chaitanya under the guidance of His bonafide
representative, can become a spiritual master and I wish that in my absence all my
disciples become the bonafide spiritual master to spread Krishna consciousness
throughout the whole world. I want it. . . .
[Letter to Madhusudana, 2 November 1967]
In 1975 he wrote that after his departure he wanted his disciples to become diksa-gurus if they
developed the necessary qualifications:
Keep trained up very rigidly and then you are bona fide guru, and you can accept
disciples on the same principle. But as a matter of etiquette it is the custom that during the
lifetime of your spiritual master you bring the prospective disciples to him, and in his absence
or disappearance you can accept disciples without any limitation. This is the law of disciplic
succession. I want to see my disciples become bona fide spiritual master and spread Krsna
consciousness very widely. That will make me and Krsna very happy. [Letter to Tusta Krsna
Swami, 2 December 1975]
Srila Prabhupada wanted his disciples to attain a certain level of spiritual advancement before
taking up the service of giving diksa. The minimum level he expected is expressed in the following
quotes:
Generally the spiritual master comes from the group of such eternal associates of the
Lord; but anyone who follows the principles of such ever liberated persons is as good
as one in the above mentioned group. . . . A person who is liberated acharya and
guru cannot commit any mistake, but there are persons who are less qualified or not
liberated, but still can act as guru and acharya by strictly following the disciplic
succession. [Letter to Janardana, 26 April 1968]
Tamal Krsna: Well, I have studied myself and all of your disciples, and it’s a clear
fact that we are all conditioned souls, so we cannot be guru. Maybe one day it may
be possible . . .
Prabhupada: Hmm.
Tamal Ksna: . . . but not now.
Prabhupada: Yes. I shall choose some guru. I shall say, “Now you become acarya.
You become authorized.” I am waiting for that. You become all acarya. I retire
completely. But the training must be complete.
Tamal Krsna: The process of purification must be there.
Prabhupada: Oh, yes, must be there. Caitanya Mahaprabhu wants that. amara
ajnaya guru hana. “You become guru.” [laughs] But be qualified. Little thing, strictly
follower . . .
Tamal Krsna: Not rubber stamp.
Prabhupada:: Then you’ll not be effective. You can cheat, but it will not be effective.
[Room Conversation, 22 April 1977, Bombay]
An example of training and assessment for initiating spiritual masters that could
be further developed is scriptural training and tests. As early as 1969 Srila Prabhupada explained a
future program of sastric training so that his disciples would have the necessary philosophical
knowledge to act as initiating spiritual masters:
Next January there will be an examination on this Bhagavad-gita. Papers will be sent by
me to all centers, and those securing the minimum passing grade will be given the title as
Bhakti-sastri. Similarly, another examination will be held on Lord Caitanya's Appearance Day
in February, 1970 and it will be upon Srimad-Bhagavatam and Bhagavad-gita. Those
passing will get the title of Bhakti-vaibhava. Another examination will be held sometimes in
1971 on the four books, Bhagavad-gita, Srimad-Bhagavatam, Teachings of Lord Caitanya,
and Nectar of Devotion. One who will pass this examination will be awarded with the title of
Bhaktivedanta. I want that all of my spiritual sons and daughters will inherit this title of
Bhaktivedanta, so that the family transcendental diploma will continue through the
generations. Those possessing the title of Bhaktivedanta will be allowed to initiate disciples.
Maybe by 1975, all of my disciples will be allowed to initiate and increase the numbers of the
generations. That is my program. So we should not simply publish these books for reading
by outsiders, but our students must be well versed in all of our books so that we can be
prepared to defeat all opposing parties in the matter of self-realization.
[Letter to: Hansadutta -- Los Angeles 3 January, 1969]
While neither Srila Prabhupada nor the GBC put the specifics of this idea in place, the principle is
clear that devotees who accept disciples are subject to specific training, standards and oversight
before they are allowed to initiate disciples.
After creating the GBC in 1970, Srila Prabhupada wrote: I have formed this GBC for that purpose, to
keep the devotional standards at the highest level and at the same time to manage a world-wide
organization. [Letter to Rupanuga, 4 Nov 1970]
Certainly the qualifications of gurus (and the qualifications of disciples) fall within the "devotional
standards" mentioned by Srila Prabhupada to be safeguarded, and in some cases clarified, by the
GBC.
Srila Prabhupada indicated the need for sastric degrees for many levels of service in ISKCON, and
he left the duty to clarify and codify those degrees and levels to the GBC: As far as the Bhakti-sastri
and other examinations are concerned, that we will discuss at the GBC meeting. [Letter to Nitai, 24
Jan 1976]
The persons best able to ascertain whether a proposed guru has been sufficiently steady in his
service and loyal to Srila Prabhupada are the senior devotees who have known and served with the
candidate for many years; that is, his peers and seniors in his geographic areas of service.
Prospective diksa-gurus are assessed by a group of senior ISKCON leaders from the area where
they reside and preach to determine whether they have the minimum qualifications required to
accept disciples according to Srila Prabhupada’s instructions. A final review is done by the GBC.
The GBC has also provided the “Spiritual Leadership Seminar: Being a guru in ISKCON” to assist
diksa gurus in their service of caring for disciples and serving within Srila Prabhupada’s
ISKCON. There are also regular sangas where the gurus, sannyasis and GBC associate with each
other.
The GBC, following Srila Prabhupada’s example and instructions, thus understands that one of its
duties is to implement systems of assessment and training so that qualified devotees may take up
the service of becoming initiating spiritual masters in ISKCON.
Appendix 10
Norms for Classroom Behavior
During the course, in order to maintain an appropriate learning environment, students will
agree to follow the following guidelines.
1. We will be present for the entire course.
2. We will raise hands to contribute.
3. We will value student contributions whether or not we agree with them.
4. We will refrain from side conversations.
5. We will refrain from making & receiving mobile phone calls during class.
6. We will observe confidentiality within and without the classroom.
7. We will refrain from borrowing strength from status or position.
8. We respect the right of the individual to withdraw, without stating reasons,
from any exercise which makes them feel unduly uncomfortable.
9. We will each accept full responsibility for success in achieving our desired
outcomes.
10. We will confront issues or behaviour, not people.
11. We will each honour any agreement reached.
Appendix 11
Further Reading
For further information on the subject of discipleship in ISKCON, students may refer to the
following suggested publications.
Spiritual Master and Disciple
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda
Bhaktivedanta Book Trust
Çréla Prabhupäda: The Founder-Acarya of ISKCON
GBC Foundational Document
Ravīndra Svarūpa Dāsa
ISKCON GBC Press
How to Find Guru
Gopal Jiu Publications
The Process of Inquiry
Sri Srimad Gour Govinda Swami
Gopal Jiu Publications
The Worship of Sri Guru
Sri Srimad Gour Govinda Swami
Gopal Jiu Publications
The Siksa-guru: Implementing Tradition in ISKCON
Sivarama Swami
Torchlight Publishing
Siksa Outside ISKCON?
Sivarama Swami
Lal Publishing
When Good Fortune Arises
Gopal Jiu Publications
ISKCON Disciples Course
Suggested 4 Day Schedule 9
Day 1
10.30 AM -1.30 PM
Lesson 1
Lesson 2
Unit One:
Welcome & Introduction
Guru-tattva and Paramparä
30 mins
75 mins
3.30-6.30 PM
Lesson 3
Lesson 4
Çréla Prabhupäda - ISKCON Founder Äcärya
ISKCON Gurus
75 mins
90 mins
Unit Two:
Introduction, Theory and Context
Day 2
10.30 AM -1.30 PM
Lesson 5
Lesson 6
Guru-pädäçraya
Selection of Guru
75 mins
90 mins
3.30-6.30 PM
Lesson 7
Lesson 8
Initiation Vows
Guru-püjä
75 mins
90 mins
Unit 3:
Establishing the Relationship with Guru
Day 3
10.30 AM -1.30 PM
Lesson 9
Lesson 10
Acting in Relationship with the Guru
Guru- sevä
Guru vapu and väëé-sevä
75 mins
90 mins
3.30-6.30 PM
Lesson 11
Lesson 12
Guru-tyäga
Presenting One’s Guru
75 mins
90 mins
Day 4
Unit 4:
10.30 AM -1.30 PM
Lesson 13
Lesson 14
Relationships within ISKCON
Course Round Up
75 mins
90 mins
Assessment Units 3-4
120 mins
Co-operatively Fulfilling the Relationship
Assessment /Consolidation
3.30-5.30 PM
Note that the scheduled may be adjusted according to convenience.
