--- SOURCE: Subodhini-3/index.html ---
Subodhini-3
BHAGAVA'
SUBODHINI
Enriching the Experience of Srimad-Bhágavatam Study,
CANTO 3
BHAKTI               EDM?TA
VIDYAPITH/3
rV
y/ ekánta-lábham vacaso nu pumsám                                  /
susloka-mauler guna-vádam áhuh                         'Í37/
^^^%i3 srutes ca vidvadbhir upákrtáyám
^kathá-sudháyám upasamprayogam
\A
The highest perfectional gain of humanity is to engage in
discussions of the activities and glories of the Pious Actor.
Such activities are so nicely arranged in writing by the greatly^^
learned sages that the actual purpose of the ear is served just
by being near them. [SB 3.6.37] ;Í        J^^^
V
Li3^^
Ai       yy
BHAGAVATA SUBODHINI                                        3      yj^l
y
y w ^ )y    ^ \-
Have   a bird's eye view of the Srimad-Bhágavatam Cantos
Explore the Interconnections between different Sections
Familiarize yourself with the Flow of verses in a chapter
Dive deep into the Authentic imports of Vitai verses
Delight on the Thematic perspectives and Compilations
A/ Marvei at the richness of characters, boly names and analogies
y> r     4 : V A ) Ji?i
This     publication        is a precious         j e w e l , both   adding to the unlimited                  radiance
of K t i s h n a ' s    presence   as   Srimad-Bhagavatam                and reflecting           that      splendour.
W h a t is special: the clarity of both the text and its graphic presentation,                                 enabling
a full and penetrating comprehension of the Bhagavatam's structure and profundity.
- H H D E V A M R I T A SWAMI
I a m sincerely grateful to the B h a k t i v e d a n t a V i d y a p i t h a for their dedicated efforts to
present this publication - Bhagavata Subodhini. I pray that each reader m a y enter
deeper and deeper into the knowledge and devotional love ( B h a k t i Ras) of the essence
of all Vedas - S r i m a d B h a g a v a t a m .
BHAGAVATA                  SUBODHINI         is     a    praiseworthy          project      for     deepening        our
appreciation of the B h a g a v a t a m , p a r t i c u l a r l y f r o m the insight of Srila V i s v a n a t h a
C a k r a v a r t i . B y concisely organizing his analysis of the w o r k , the devotee w i l l be able
to relish both the Bhagavatam and V i s v a n a t h a ' s realizations. C a i t a n y a M a h a p r a b h u
has accepted Bhagavatam as the m a i n p r a m a n a since it is the conclusion of a l l
scriptures.            B y understanding its import the devotee w i l l be able to grasp the
theology, practice and goal of the V e d i c tradition i n a most compact f o r m .
- H H B H A N U SWAMI
pibata bhagavatam              rasamdlayam
Bhagavata Subodhini is a n excellent study guide that makes S r i m a d Bhagavatam
more relishable a n d easier to digest. D r a w i n g strength                        f r o m the Bhaktivedanta
Purports and Bhagavad commentaries                         by Srila V i s v a n a t h a C a k r a v a r t i T h a k u r a ,
Bhagavata Subodhini is a great tool for an in-depth, systematic and scrutinising study
of Srimad Bhagavatam. I strongly recommend this masterpiece for one and a l l , young
and o l d , alike. M y hearty congratulations to the Bhaktivedanta V i d y a p i t h a team of
C o v a r d h a n Eco-village for this invaluable publication. I pray that they do not stop till
the goal of publishing guides for a l l the twelve cantos is teached.
- H H L O K A N A T H A SWAMI
I found Bhagavata Subodhini v e t y interesting and useful, for it presents the contents
of Bhagavatam i n a systematic and lucid manner. I a m v e t y happy that the devotees
in our society are producing such w o n d e r f u l literature based on Srila Prabhupada's
books and commentaries of other acharyas. I like the fact that in one book I have
access to commentaries of different acaryas, that too presented in a n interesting
tabular formát w h i c h made it easy and clear to read. T h i s book is like a Bhagavatam
digest. I t helps the preachers in their presentations on B h a g a v a t a m . I w i s h I had
access to such books before. I encourage devotees to come together, for this k i n d of
study and contemplation on the B h a g a v a t a m .
It is a guide, I use to get a bird's eye v i e w of a C h a p t e r , to spot out D i a m o n d like
sections for deeper contemplation and nectar like slokas for relishing and repeating to
others. I t has increased m y appetite for B h a g a v a t a m study and gain great spiritual
advantage. T h a n k s to B h a k t i v e d a n t a V i d y a p i t h a for their dedicated efforts i n m a k i n g
srila Prabhupada's master piece w o r k more easy and accessible for a l l . H a r e K r i s h n a .
- H G R A D H E S H Y A M DAS
y
SUBODHINI
Enriching the Experience                 of Srimad-Bhagavatam study
CANTO 3
BHAKTI                                EDANTA
IDYAPlTHA
T R U T H   •   T R A D I T I O N   •   T R A N s F o R MA r io N
For more details, kindly correspond with:
Bhaktivedanta Vidyapitha
Govardhan Eco Village
Galtare, Hamrapur (P.O),
Wada (Taluka), Palghar (District),
B H A K T I ^ / EDANTA                      421303 - Maharashtra, India
IDYAPlTHA                    www.vidyapitha.in, www.ecovillage.org.in
TRUTH   • TRADITION   •   TRANSFORMATION
Email: info@vidyapitha.in
Puhlished and Printed by:
Tulsi Books
(A division of Sri Tulsi Trust)
TuífiI
7. K. M. Munshi marg,
Girgaum Chowpatty
Mumbai - 400007
Books             www.tulsibooks.com
Email: tulsibookssales@gmail.com
© 2015, Sri Tulsi Trust
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrievai system
or transmitted in any form, or by any means (electronic, mecbanical, pbotocopying, recording
or otherwise) without the prior written permission of Sri Tulsi Trust.
Trust, Used with Permission.
B H A G A V A T A SUBODHINI C A N T O 3
ISBN: 978-93-81283-30-1
First Edition - January 2016: 2,000 Copies
Dedicated to
Founder Acharya: International Society for Krishna Consciousness
•          n
yair ídrsí bhagavato gatir átma-váda
ekántato nigamibhih pratipáditá nah
tusyantv adabhra-karunáh sva-krtena nityam
ko náma tat pratikaroti vinoda-pátram
How can such persons, who have rendered unlimited service by explaining the path of self-
reaiization in relation to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and whose explanations are
given for our enlightenment with complete conviction and Vedic evidence, be repaid except
by földed palms containing water for their satisfaction? Such great personalities can be
satisfied only by their own activities, which are distributed amongst humán society out of
their unlimited mercy.
[Srimad-Bhágavatam 4.22.47]
f       •   7
Bhagavata Subodhini       ..^lfáí%f£'áí%ffáí%f^éí%fféí%f^éí%ff é^^^
Srimad-Bhágavatam 4 . 2 2 . 4 7 , yair tdrst...       describes our disqualification to sufficiently
thank Srila Prabhupada and Srila V i s v a n a t h a C a k r a v a r t i T h a k u r a for enabling us to
access the w e a l t h of Srimad-Bhágavatam w i t h their enlightened commentaries; yet
f r o m the core of our hearts, w e express our deepest gratitude to a l l the ácáryas. W e
also thank H i s Holiness Bhánu Swámi M a h á r a j a w h o translated Sárártha-Darsini
commentary into E n g l i s h . W e thank H i s C r a c e B h u r i j a n a P r a b h u for his phenomenal
w o r k " U n v e i l i n g H i s L o t u s F e e t " that provided us the guidelines to systematically
study the first four cantos of Srimad-Bhágavatam.
We    owe a millión         thanks to       H i s H o l i n e s s Rádhánátha       Swámi      Maháraja       for
envisaging and guiding the C o v a r d h a n E c o V i l l a g e project that offers a perfect
amhience for sástric study. O u r heartfeit gratitude to Cauránga                             Prabhu, who
envisioned     and directed Bhaktivedánta                Vidyápitha,      and inspired thousands              of
devotees w i t h his study and discourses on Srimad-Bhágavatam. W e thank a l l the
teachers    of Bhaktivedánta          Vidyápitha for their consistent               efforts i n explaining
Srimad-Bhágavatam to the students. W e thank Radhesyám P r a b h u not only for a l l
the encouragement he has given for the m a k i n g of the book, but also for his valuable
presence at Bhaktivedánta Vidyápitha for t w o f u l l years. Special thanks to Balarám
Sakti P r a b h u w h o systematically spoke on the teachings of L o r d K a p i l a at the
Vidyápitha.
W e thank H i s H o l i n e s s B h a k t i Vijnána C o s w á m i M a h á r á j a and T u k á r á m a P r a b h u
for their valuable comments. W e are grateful to a l l the devotees w h o encouraged us
w i t h their inputs and timely guidance i n preparing this book. O u r thanks to the entire
T u l s i Books team for publishing this book. I t is not possible to name a l l the devotees
at C o v a r d h a n L c o V i l l a g e for supporting our study of Srimad-Bhágavatam                        at
Bhaktivedánta Vidyápitha and thus i n the m a k i n g of Bhágavata Subodhini. W i t h
földed palms w e seek their blessings to continue our service to S r i m a d Bhágavatam,
Srila Prabhupáda and his mission.
- Bhaktivedánta       Vidyápitha       Team
About Bhaktivedanta Vidyapítha 8
About Bhágavata Subodhiní 12
^   About the Third Canto 18
^   Srimad-Bhágavatam Canto 3 Overview
Verse-by-verse Overview with Flowcharts 23
^   Special Verses
Ácáryas' explanations on Select verses 205
^   Thematic Compílations
Cross sectional Overview of Specific Themes 227
^   Appendix
Character portrayals, Krsna's Names, Analogies 261
Bhágavata SubodhinT                 l^íífií'^rjíjklglHÍjj';^^
O n M a y ÍV         1969, H i s D i v i n e G r a c e A . G . B h a k t i v e d a n t a S w a m i Prabhupada arrived
at N e w V r i n d a b a n , W e s t V i r g i n i a , U . S . A , on his first visit to the mountain asram.
T h i s dsram     w a s the first f a r m c o m m u n i t y of the International Society for K r s n a
Gonsciousness i n the W e s t . Srila Prabhupada had numerous ideas and desires on h o w
to develop this community to be a replica of V r i n d a b a n i n I n d i a . H a v i n g                       left
V r i n d a b a n in 1965 to spread the glories of L o r d K r s n a , Srila Prabhupada n o w set
forth to manifest V r i n d a b a n - and the spirit of loving devotional service - in all parts
of the w o r l d .
"/ am so glad to learn that one gentleman                     is going to open an dsram           in
the West Virginia,           and he has secured        a hig tract of land, 320 acres,          and
I wish       that this tract of land may          be turnéd     into New       Vrinddban.       You
have     New       York,     New    England,     and     so   many     "New"      duplicates      of
European         countries    in the USA; why not import New               Vrinddban        in your
country^'
(Letter to Hayagríva,    IT^ March      1968)
Srila Prabhupada shared this v i s i o n for N e w V r i n d a b a n w i t h his disciples on various
occasions.      I n his letters to H a y a g r i v a , Kirtanánda             and f e w others during           1968
through 1973, Prabhupada emphasized several times on the various vitai aspects of
the f a r m community, namely - C o w protection, Sustainable A g r i c u l t u r e (producing
o w n food), Simple Village L i f e (Plain l i v i n g , H i g h t h i n k i n g - saving time for spiritual
advancement), A place of Pilgrimage (a replica of V r i n d a b a n , w i t h all major temples
and kunds),          A Place of H i g h e r learning (Rüpánuga Vidyápitha and T h e i s t i c school)
and ultimately a place for people to develop their love for K r s n a .
Focusing on the education aspect, Srila Prabhupada wrote to A n i r u d d h a on                                            4*
F e b r u a r y 1969, about his desire for a well-established system of education specifically
dedicated to sástric study or the study of the V a i s n a v a literatures. "...We                         can start a
theological    school also, along with a boys primary                 school.     Our theological          school          will
regularly     teach    our    published     books,      such     as   Bhagavad-gitá         As     It    Is,       Srimad-
Bhágavatam,       Teachings     of Lord     Caitanya,     Nectar      of Devotion,        Brahma        Sarhhitd,          and
Krsna.      We wish    to hold examinations          and award        titles    such as Bhaktisdstri,                 Bhakti-
vaibhava,     and Bhaktiveddnta.          The whole program           will continue       for seven            years..."
Desiring to implement this vision of Srila Prabhupada, H i s Holiness Rádhanátha
S w a m i M a h a r á j a directed I S K C O N C h o w p a t t y to begin a f a r m community called
G o v a r d h a n F c o V i l l a g e ( G F V ) , i n 2 0 0 3 , focusing on the above-mentioned                         vitai
aspects. Since its inception i n 2 0 0 3 , G F V has made steady progress i n the areas of
cow protection and organic f a r m i n g . I n 2 0 0 9 , G F V began its full-scale focus on the
development of a retreat center w h i c h is succesfully r u n n i n g n o w . I n the recent years,
Govardhan        Fco    Village     replicated       Vrindaban         forest      with     its   seven          temples,
G o v a r d h a n and R i v e r Y a m u n a and gained local as w e l l as International popularity.
T h e education aspect at G F V includes -                     the activities of L N H O           School for the
under-previleged r u r a l c h i l d r e n , and the r u r a l outreach programs conducted i n over
30 villages around G F V . I n 2012, B h a k t i v e d a n t a Vidyápitha has been established at
G F V as an addition to I S K C O N C h o w p a t t y ' s training program for the n e w l y joined
monks.
Bhaktivedánta         Vidyápitha is a two-year f u l l time study course for the resident
devotees      at G o v a r d h a n F c o V i l l a g e . I t covers the systematic study of S r i m a d -
Bhágavatam        and S r i C a i t a n y a Caritámrta           translated       and commented                  by     Srila
Prabhupáda. I n addition, commentaries by ácáryas like Srila Visvanátha C a k r a v a r t i
Thákura are also referred to enrich the understanding of the students. T h e course is
based on a ' 5 S ' model as described below and helps to provide a wholesome, all
round development of a sincere practitioner of B h a k t i , as per its vision and mission
statements.
Bhágavata Subodhiní                                                                                  t'J'
VISION
Inspiring     and inculcating Vaisnava qualities and a mood of selfless                 service
in the followers     of the International    Society for Krsna Gonsciousness,             by
creating a strong sástric foundation        for their spiritual    lives.
MISSION
Assisting the devotees in understanding             the glorious contribution      of Srila
Prabhupada's      books, by systematically     studying them and            contemplating
practical     ways for application     of their teachings through an           effective
educational framework        as envisaged by the Gaudiya               Vaisnava
parampará.
The Svádhyáya aspect, involves five elements -
a.   Sravanam (Hearing) - Daily classes are conducted progressing verse by verse
along with discussions on the purports. Special seminars covering important
topics for character development such as leadership, Vaisnava dealings, etc.
are organized once a month.
b. Mananam (RecoUection) - Daily closed book tests are conducted based on
the previous day's coverage of the syllabus to ensure the students' regular
study. In addition, a weekly review is organized to recap the week's study.
c.   Nididhyásanam (Contemplation) - Vidyápitha studies also include a channel
to express one's gathered learning in the form of open book essays and
assignments. Students are required to sift through the Canto looking for
common themes, or elaborating on a notable phrase hased on what they have
studied and learnt.
d. Pathanam (Recitation) - No Vedic institution is complete without recitation
of scriptural verses. At Bhaktivedanta Vidyápitha, students daily recite select
verses from the on-going section of the Bhágavatam.
e.   Kírtanam (Speaking) - The students are also trained in communication skills
and impromptu speech and thought, by asking them to present on various
topics or themes at regular intervals.
Sádhana involves the standard spiritual practices in I S K C O N such as the morning
program. On the other hand, Sevá consists of voluntary work in the farm, such as
serving cows or facilitating guests. Students are encouraged to study in groups, work
in teams for projects and this strengthens the Sahga element. The Sadácara aspect
involves the overall practice of the other four elements, grooming the student's
interpersonal skills, and encouraging one's dealings based on respect, gratitude and
interdependance for mutual growth and sustenance.
Bhaktivedánta Vidyápitha has been a dream come true for many devotees who desire
to study the Bhaktivedánta Purports. In sight of this, an online Bhágavatam course
{vidyapitha.in)   had been made available, where students can study at their
convenience.
Bhagavata Subodhini   ^      •fÍk'&^(í'&'tí''&'tV^&^éV'^2^iV'^éV'^
A B O U T BHAGAVATA SUBODHINÍ
Srimad-Bhagavatam has earned its novelty amongst the modern philosophers,
theologians and historians alike due to the unprecedented efforts of His Divine Grace
A . C . Bhaktivedánta Swámi Prabhupáda, the Founder Acharya of the International
Society of Krsna Consciousness ( I S K C O N ) . He personally undertook the herculean
task of translating and providing commentary in English - of this voluminous
masterpiece - which was originally rendered in the Sanskrit language. He had
unveiled to the English-speaking world the secrets of the Vedic Culture that focused
on perfecting the humán form of life. The elité scholars of the 70's were blessed with
such a voluminous presentation of the Srimad-Bhágavatam that they took to
scrutinizing its work and content. I n fact, many universities and colleges across the
United States had included this work in their academic libraries.
Having begun his society in the Bowery quarter of New York City, Bhaktivedánta
SwámI delivered daily classes on the Bhágavatam where most of his audiences were
the beatniks of the counter culture - fondly known as the hippies. They took to the
illuminating radiance of the Bhágavatam and while basking in its splendor; the
hippies hegan to turn a new leaf. Society witnessed their change in character,
appearance and behavior. "Who were once a thorn in the social body of New Yorkers,
the hippies, had now become fuU-fledged contributing members of the society.
Bhaktivedánta Swámi uncannily called them "the happies." This unique dual class
appreciation from extrémé ends of the social strata and an incredible effect on an
individual's persona is rarely observed with any normál book or literature; but the
Bhágavatam had that potency.
BHÁGAVATAM COMPARED TO LORD'S BODY
Srimad-Bhágavatam is a classic that is able to churn out endless life lessons,
inspiration, philosophical knowledge and more importantly the purpose of life. Its
LVé*7,m                         About Bhagavata Subodhini
glories are limitless and it presents the tatest knowledge about the identity, nature
and character of the Supreme Creator, the Supreme Lord Sri Krsna. The Srimad-
Bhágavatam     has twelve cantos,          which     represent        the different limbs of            the
transcendental body of the Supreme Lord.
pádau yadiyau prathama-dvitiyau                trtiya-türyau    kathitau     yad-ürü
nábhis tathá paitcama eva sastho            bhujántarath       dor-yugalath     tathányau
kanthas tu rdjan navamo yadiyo            mukhdravindam dasamah praphullam
ekddaso yasya laldta-pattam           siro'pi tu dvddasa eva bhdti
tam ddidevarh karund-nidhdnam              tamdla-varnarh           suhitdvatdram
apdra-samsdra-samudra-seturh              bhajdmahe           bhdgavata-svarüpam
"The first and second cantos of the Bhágavatam are Sri Krsna's lotus feet. The
third and fourth cantos are His thighs. The fifth canto is His navel. The sixth
canto is His chest. The seventh and eighth cantos are His arms. The ninth
canto is His throat. The tenth canto is His beautiful lotus-face. The eleventh
canto is His forehead. The twelfth canto is His head. I bow down to that Lord,
the ocean of mercy whose color is like that of a tamála tree and who appears in
this world for the welfare of all. I worship Him as the bridge for crossing the
unfathomable ocean of matériái existence. The Bhágavatam has appeared as
His very Self." [Padnta Purdna]
SRÍLA PRABHUPADA'S EMPHASIS ON SYSTEMATIC STUDY
Srila Prabhupáda compared Bhágavatam study with taking darsan of the deity of
Lord Krsna, which is done gradually from Lord's lotus feet to the lotus face. He
emphasizes a step-by-step study of the Bhágavatam in his preface to Srimad-
Bhágavatam: "Srimad-Bhdgavatam             begins with the definition of the ultimate source.
It is a bona fide commentary             on the Veddnta-sütra            by the same author,        Srila
Vydsadeva, and gradually it develops into nine cantos up to the highest state of God
realization.   The   only     qualification    one    needs      to    study    this   great     book    of
transcendental knowledge is to proceed step by step cautiously and not jump                       forward
haphazardly as with an ordinary book. It should be gone through chapter by chapter,
one after another. The reading matter is so arranged with its originál Sanskrit text, its
English transliteration,     synonyms,     translation     and purports        so that one is sure to
become a God-realized soul at the end of finishing the first nine cantos."
Bhagavata Subodhiní
ÁCÁRYAS' UNPARALLELED CONTRIBUTION
The Vedic Encyclopedia, Srimad-Bhágavatam, like an ocean, is expansive with its
nominal and phenomenal subject matters and deep in its spiritual and philosophical
insights, making it a text for both research and relish by many. Srila Prabhupáda
mentions in his purport to the first verse of Bhágavatam: "...there is no doubt about
the authority of the Bhágavatam.   Within the past five hundred years, many erudite
scholars and dcdryas like Jiva Gosvdmi, Sandtana Gosvdmi, Visvandtha       Cakravarti,
Vallabhdcdrya,   and many other distinguished scholars even after the time of      Lord
Caitanya made elaborate commentaries on the Bhágavatam.      And the serious student
would do ivell to attempt to go through them to better relish the      transcendental
messages."
Most verses of the Bhágavatam are given descriptive commentaries by various
Gaudiya-vaisnava ácáryas. Amongst them is the esteemed           commentator       Srila
Visvanátha Cakravarti Thákura. His explanations are devotional, relishing, logical,
highly regarded in the study circles of Bhágavatam, and are often quoted in the
Bhaktivedánta purports. He is well known for giving connections between verses and
chapters, presenting the conversations and prayers in an interesting dialogue manner
and giving positive interpretations to the blasphemous words of demons directed
towards the Lord and His devotees. Unsurprisingly therefore, the various links
between verses, sections, chapters and even cantos, and additional information that
are presented in Bhágavata Subodhini, find their major source in the Sárártha darsini
commentary of Cakravarti Thákura.
BHAGAVATA SUBODHINÍ aims at helping the           readet to relish studying or reading
through the Srimad-Bhágavatam. Regular readers of the Bhágavatam might often
have the experience of - becoming lost in the multitudes of conversations and
flashbacks; challenging to keep track of the various personalities and episodes
mentioned; complicated technical aspects like creation, Universal form and time etc.
Because of this, readers tend to read selective sections or pastimes from the
Bhágavatam rather than endeavoring for a systematic approach. Having taken into
consideration all these academic anomalies that inhihits one from fully delighting in
the wonders of the Bhágavatam, the Bhaktivedánta Vidyápitha designed a systematic
framework to present the Bhágavatam in a lucid manner - Bhágavata     Subodhini.
About Bhagavata Subodhini
Bhágavata Subodhini simplifies the apparent complexity i n understanding the
Bhágavatam, by uncovering and integrating the explanations of Srila Prabhupáda
and the previous ácáryas, and thus caters to the taste and need of avid readers,
scholars, and even newcomers to the Srimad-Bhágavatam.
Therefore, anyone who hasn't even heard of the Bhágavatam can read through
Bhagavata Subodhini and develop an interest in the originál manuscript. However,
this book is not meant to be a replacement for a detailed study of Bhágavatam, hut a
complement for devotees, students and curious readers. It is therefore advised that
one simultaneously refer to the Bhágavatam while going through this book, and study
Bhágavatam with the assistance of Bhagavata Subodhini. We hope that this attempt
to sérve the Vaisnava community would be pleasing to all the Vaisnavas. The
following is a brief description of the various features of Bhágavata Subodhini.
OVERVIEW
This is the main section of Bhágavata Subodhini that gives an overview of the third
canto, while the other sections sérve as auxiliary contents that enhance one's
appreciation of the third canto. The following are the various features of this section.
•     Canto 3 A t a Glancé - Overview of the entire canto presented in a flowchart.
•    Chapter Overview chart - Provides a bird's eye view of the major sections and
subsections of a chapter.
•     Section - A group of verses that fali under the same heading.
•     Subsection - A sub group of verses under a section
•    Verse synopsis - A brief summary of a verse that highlights its import (a
condensed version of its translation by Srila Prabhupáda and Srila Visvanátha
Cakravarti thákura). A l l the verses are duly numbered and important keywords
of the Sanskrit verse are given in brackets.
•    L i n k - The connection between two verses or sections or subsections, which is
often taken from Srila Visvanátha Cakravarti tháküra's Sárártha Darsini
commentary.
•     Sanskrit Verse - A most vitai verse of the chapter presented in the flow, which is
worth memorizing.
•     Table - A list of items under a section
•     Llow C h a r t - Cives a bird's eye view of a sequense of events or the flow of
prayers.
•   Note - A vitai comment or explanation on a verse or a section, mainly related to
the flow of the chapter, taken from the purports of Sríla Prabhupáda and/or Sríla
Visvanátha Cakravarti Tháküra for enhancing the understanding of those verses
or sections, their context and philosophical depth. [However, when Sríla
Visvanátha Cakravarti Tháküra gives a unique and different perspective other
than the one given by Srila Prabhupáda, his name is mentioned in that Note.]
SPECIAL VERSES
This section contains select verses form a canto that carry deep and extraordinary
import in terms of philosophy (siddhanta) and emotions (bhava) that can increasingly
enhance the reader's appreciation. These verses can be considered as jewels that are
found in the depths of the ocean and the ácáryas, our guides, help us in accessing
them. We've provided a list of few citations by the various acaryas (wherever
possible), focusing on the numerous ways one can understand a single verse. These
different angles of vision in relishing the verses of the Bhágavatam are the glory of
the Vaisnava ácáryas for their astounding realization and expert presentation. The list
of citations are not exhaustive, and surely all verses of the Bhágavatam are equally
important, nevertheless, from these few pearls of Special Verses, one can only
imagine the pelagic treasures from the entire ocean of the Bhágavatam.
THEMATIC COMPILATIONS
This section consists of multiple prominent themes that are present in the specific
cantos of Srimad Bhágavatam. Each compilation contains a comprehensive list of
verses on a particular theme. The objective of this section is to make the readers
appreciate the cross sectional overview on a specific theme revealed in various
chapters of a canto, in addition to inspiring one to study the Bhágavatam from
various angles. These compilations are based on the analysis and research of many
devotees as a part of their study at the Bhaktivedánta Vidyápitha.
APPENDIX
The extensive lists of reference matériái from the Bhágavatam cantos are presented in
this section. Unlike the Thematic Compilations, these materials are more or less
direct in nature with little or no analysis like the names of Lord Krsna, saintly
qualities and analogies. Also, quick overviews of somé crucial characters that appear
About Bhágavata Subodhini
throughout the canto(s) are presented. This section aims at providing an interesting,
quick yet extensive reference guide.
NOMENCLATURE
To keep the reading of Bhágavata Subodhini relatively simpie, we've used the
referencing for verses in the standard "canto, chapter and verse number" formát. The
following short forms represent their equivalent expanded forms given against them.
•    SB - Srimad Bhágavatam
•    C C - Sri Caitanya Caritámrta
•    BRS - Bhakti Rasámrta Sindhu
•    CB - Caitanya Bhágavata
•    3.2.6 - SB Canto Three, Chapter Two, Verse Six
•    3.2.6 P - Srila Prabhupáda's purport on 3.2.6
•   3.2.6 V - Srila Visvanátha Cakravarti tháküra's commentary on 3.2.6
References to other books would be stated distinctively.
We humbly bow down to all the Vaisnavas and seek their blessings that this book -
with all its faults in presentation, language and grammar - is able to inspire one to
study Srimad-Bhágavatam. Srila Prabhupáda had quoted the following verse in his
introduction to the Bhágavatam; with faith that this book-form of Lord Krsna will
bring light into the darkness of Kali-yuga and dissipate the ignorance in our hearts.
tad-vág-visargo  janatdgha-viplavo
yasmin prati-slokam abaddhavaty api
ndmdny anantasya yaso 'nkitdni yac
chrnvanti gdyanti grnanti sddhavah
"On the other hand, that literature which is full of descriptions of the
transcendental glories of the name, fame, forms, pastimes, etc, of the unlimited
Supreme Lord is a different creation, full of transcendental words directed toward
bringing about a revolution in the impious lives of this world's misdirected
civilization. Such transcendental literatures, even though imperfectly composed,
are heard, sung and accepted by purified men who are thoroughly honest." [1.5.11)
We pray that our humble attempt in presenting this Bhágavata Subodhini
pleases Srila Prabhupáda, the ácáryas and the Vaisnava community.
- Bhaktiveddnta Vidydpitha Team
A B O U T T H E THIRD C A N T O
Srimad-Bhágavatam, the ripened fruit of the tree of Vedic wisdom compiled by Srila
Vyásadeva at the maturity of his knowledge, is non-different from the Supreme Lord,
Sri Krsna. It is the granthávatara   of the Lord that narrates the pastimes of various
avatáras of the Lord. Also glorified as a mahá-purána, it is rich with the descriptions
of the ten subjects beginning with sárga.
atra sargo visargas ca sthánam posanam     ütayah
manvantaresánukathd     nirodho muktir dsrayah
In the Srimad-Bhágavatam there are ten divisions of statements regarding the
following: the creation of the universe, subcreation, planetary systems,
protection by the Lord, the creative impetus, the change of Manus, the science
of God, returning home, back to Godhead, liberation, and the summum
bonum. [SB 2.10.1]
Srila Jiva Gosvámi has explained that the ten principal topics of Srimad-Bhágavatam
are found within each of the twelve cantos. He also mentioned that one should not
assign each of the ten topics to a particular canto. Nor should the Srimad-
Bhágavatam be artificially interpreted to show that it deals with the topics
successively. The simple fact is that all the aspects of knowledge important to humán
beings, summarized in the ten categories mentioned above, are described with various
degrees of emphasis and analysis throughout the Srimad-Bhágavatam. (SB 12.7.9-10
Purport). Although a specific topic is emphasized prominently in a particular canto of
the Bhágavatam, the other topics are also discussed in those cantos, but with
relatively lesser emphasis. A careful study will reveal that sárga is prominently found
in the Third canto, visarga in the Fourth canto, sthdnam in the Fifth canto, posana in
the Sixth canto, üti in the Seventh canto, manvantara in the Fighth canto, isdnukathd
in the Ninth canto, nirodha in the Twelfth canto, mukti in the Fleventh canto and
asraya in the Tenth canto. The prominence of the ten topics in particular cantos is
confirmed by Srila Prabhupáda and Srila Visvanátha Cakravarti Thákura. And
according to Sríla Jiva Gosvámi, the first two cantos discuss at least sárga, visarga,
posana and certainly ásraya.
T h e First canto of the Bhágavatam introduces the key philosophical elements like
Bhakti,   Bhagaván,   Bhakta    and   Bhágavatam      that   forms   the   foundational
understanding of a devotee and also the prominent characters of Srimad-Bhágavatam,
namely Pariksit Mahárája, Sukadeva Gosvámi, Srila Vyásadeva, Nárada Muni,
Vidura, Lord Krsna etc, along with their backgrounds, thus setting the stage for
unfolding of this great literature. Right at the onset, there are descriptions of the
Absolute Truth and the highest (purpose of) religion. And there is glorification of the
Bhágavatam throughout this canto in various contexts. The six questions by the sages
and their answers by Srila Süta Gosvámi (1.1-3) establish the impottance of Bhakti,
Bhagavan and Bhagavatam - devotional service as the supreme occupation of a
humán being. Lord Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the
fountainhead of innumerous incarnations, and Bhágavatam as the ultimate shelter of
religion after Krsna's disappearance. The rest of the canto majorly deals with
answering the key questions asked by the sages about the history of Bhágavatam, the
birth and activities of Pariksit Mahárája and his meeting with Sukadeva Gosvámi.
While presenting the history of the appearance of Bhágavatam (1.4-7), Süta Gosvámi
also gives the backstories of Srila Vyásadeva and Nárada Muni and the parampará of
the Bhágavatam. Along with the description of the events leading to the birth of
Pariksit (1.12), we find the prayers of queen Kunti (1.8) and the departure and prayers
of Bhisma (1.9) that announce the glory of a surrendered devotee. The chapters that
describe Lord Krsna's departure from Hastinápura (1.10) and entrance into Dváraká
(1.11) reveal the feelings of vipralambha   and sambhoga of the residents and even
introduces mádhurya    rasa of the queens of Dváraká. Another important character,
Vidura is introduced in 1.13 and the sages' inquiry about Maitreya-Vidura samváda
related to this chapter led to the Third and Fourth cantos. The canto progresses with
descriptions of the departure of the Supreme Lord Krsna (1.14), the retirement of the
virtuous Pándavas (1.15), the advent of evil Kali (1.16-17) and the renunciation of able
king Pariksit (1.18-19) showing the necessity of the Srimad-Bhágavatam and the
circumstances in which this granthávatara      made its appearance. At the end of
this canto, we get the most important questions about life asked by Pariksit. Thus
mm       Bhagavata Subodhini                                  ^/jj^^MM^^^^J^^Ű&J^^
the First Canto with all its wonderful aspects serves as an excellent introduction to
this great transcendental text Srimad-Bhágavatam.
T h e Second canto, beginning chapters (2.1-3) criticize the grhamedhl and present
Virát-rüpa and Paramátmá forms of the Lord as the objects of meditation for the
attached and detached yogis respectively and establish the supremacy of Bhakti yoga
over the other processes such as astdnga-yoga, karma-kdnda and demigod worship.
The questions by Pariksit mahárája (2.4) and Nárada Muni (2.5) about creation begin
the topic of sárga. The prayers of Sukadeva Gosvámi (2.4) and the talks of Lord
Brahmá (2.5-7) that include the descriptions of Kárana srsti (creation of 23 elements
- activities of Káranodakasáyi Visnu), Kárya srsti (assembly of elements - activities
of Garhhodakasáyi Visnu), Virát-rüpa (details of the universe and social orders) and
various avatáras (Lord's entrance into the created universe) reveal once again (both
directly and rhetorically) that Lord Krsna is the Supreme Lord and the originál source
of everything that exists. Here Brahmá gives special prominence to the position and
the activities of Lord Krsna and humbly declares his subordinate position. The
answers to the variety of questions asked by Pariksit, in 2.8, form the rest of
Bhágavatam. Sukadeva Gosvámi answers somé of them through the catuh-sloki
Bhágavatam (2.9) that contains the sambandha, abhideya and prayojana tattvas and
somé more through the description of the universal form. Thus the Second canto,
surveys several processes of the Vedic landscape and ties them together as ultimately
leading to Lord Krsna and Krsna Bhakti. And the ten topics of Bhágavatam
mentioned in 2.10 form another introduction like a map to the contents of the
Bhágavatam.
Thus the first two cantos together make an excellent prelude to the rest of the
Bhágavatam. According to Padma Purána, these two cantos correspond to the Lord's
lotus feet. And the third and the fourth cantos correspond to His thighs.
T h e T h i r d canto of Srimad Bhágavatam begins with Pariksit mahárája's inquiry
about the momeutous meeting of Vidura and Maitreya. I n the beginning, Pariksit
glorifies Vidura's inquiries as highly purposeful and approved by the learned; and so
are the answers of Maitreya, as acknowledged repeatedly by Vidura himself. Their
striking conversation spans up till the end of the fourth canto.
The beauty of the third canto lies in the variegated rangé of topics that it covers and
the awe-inspiring characters of great personalities that it describes. The topics include
About The Third Canto
creation, subcreation, time, embryology, family life, Sánkhya, bhakti yoga, astanga
yoga, jhána yoga, karma, culture, spiritual world, matériái world and hell. These
topics are interwoven in the stories, prayers and conversations of illustrious
personalities like Vidura, Uddhava, Maitreya, Brahmá, Kumáras, Jaya, Vijaya,
Sváyambhuva Manu, Devahüti and Kardama. While Lord Varáha's pastimes (3.13,
17-19) create special exhilaration, the teachings of Lord Kapila (3.25-33) will provide
one of the most deep philosophical experiences for the reader/ student of the
Bhágavatam.
The canto begins with the descriptions of Vidura's detachment and maturity (3.1); his
immense eagerness to hear Krsna-kathá is seen throughout the canto. Uddhava's deep
spiritual emotions for his beloved Lord Krsna and his amazing recoUection of Krsna's
pastimes and qualities (3.2-4) give us a glimpse not only into his devotion, but also
the sweetness of the tenth canto as a sample. Vidura's humility is evident in his
inclination to accept Uddhava, though younger, as his spiritual master. And
Uddhava's sensitivity and etiquette are laudable in not accepting the respectable elder
Vidura as a disciple, but directing him to Maitreya.
Humble Vidura's inquiries to Maitreya begin with the topics relevant for the
common man, rather than on an esoteric pláne (3.5). Maitreya descrihes the
magnificent creation of the universe originating from Mahá Visnu, His expansion
into it as Garhhodakasáyi Visnu and the manifestation of the Virát-rüpa, and at the
end, he humbly declares his inability to describe the Lord's unlimited glories (3.5-6).
Vidura's profound questions in 3.7 about various topics resemble the questions of
Pariksit in 2.8 and the answers to these questions are found in the entire Bhágavatam.
In 3.8, Maitraya describes the fascinating events of Brahmá's life - his birth, search
for Absolute truth, meditation and the beautiful darsana of Garhhodakasáyi Visnu.
Brahmá's prayers and the Lord's response (3.9) reveal the glory of the combination of
devotee's service attitűdé and the Lord's empowerment. Lurther, we see the richness
of the divisions of the matériái creation and the time factor (3.10-11) and the variety
in Brahmá's creation, visarga (3.12, 20). Along with the descriptions of the thrilling
pastimes   of   Lord   Varába   (3.13,17-19),   the   background of     Hiranyáksa   and
Hiranyakasipu as the doorkeepers of Vaikuntha, who entered the womb of Diti after
being cursed by Kumáras is given (3.14-16). These chapters describe the dangers of
lust and envy (3.14) by comparing them with the description of Vaikuntha (3.15)
where the residents are free from matériái lust and envy.
Bhagavata Subodhiní
In contrast to the household life of Kasyapa and Diti (3.14) that led to a demoniac
progeny, this canto also describes the ideál household life of Kardama and Devahüti
(3.21-24) that led to the appearance of Lord Kapiladeva. The ideál examples of
Sváyambhuva Manu as a father and ksatriya ruler, Kardama as a bráhmana sage and
Devahüti as a daughter, wife and mother are also described (3.21-24). Lord Kapila's
teachings (3.25-33) to His mother, Devahüti, open doors to a different rangé of
topics. His teachings, in essence repeatedly glorify the path of Bhakti yoga while
comparing and contrasting it to other processes like astánga yoga and jnána yoga.
Within these teachings are descriptions of - jiva (living entity), prakrti (matériái
nature) in which all the elements are described in terms of Sánkhya philosophy,
purusa (Suprme Lord), kála (time factor) and samsrti (continual birth and death of
living entity in 3.31-32), various classes of bhakti, limb-by-limb description of Lord's
form, good and had association and embryology. This section culminates in
Devahüti's prayers to Lord Kapila (3.33) that highlight the glory of the holy name,
and finally the perfection attained by Devahüti.
In this volume of Bhágavata Subodhini, the third canto is presented in a simple and
lucid manner to assist the reader in understanding it. Lspecially the technical aspects
of sárga, visarga and Lord's Kapila's teachings are presented with simplified tables
and flow charts in the Overview section; other vitai topics are presented in the
thematic compilations section. The special verses section and appendix section will
enhance the readers' appreciation for third canto.
f
Canto 3 Overview
THIRD C A N T O AT A G L A N C É
Part A: Meeting of Uddhava & Vidura (3.1-4)
Q 1 : Pariksit asked Sukadeva about Vidura-Maitreya samváda. (3.1.3-4). A1 (3.1 -4) |
T                             T
3.1: Being insulted by Duryodana,        3.2-4: Uddhava remembered          Uddhava directed
Vidura gave up his house, went             Krsna's pastimes in and        Vidura to Maitreya
for pilgrimage, met Uddhava and             outside Vrndavana and          for enlightenment.
inquired from him about Krsna,             informed about Yadus'         Vidura met Maitreya
Yadus and Kurus.                       disappearance.                at Haridwár.
A1 (3.5-6): 3.5: Pastimes of
Purusavatáras (creation of matéria!
Q 1 : Vidura asked Maitreya about            elements & prayers of sense
Purusavatáras, Virat rűpa,             devatas). 3.6: Development of
Lílávatáras, different planets and        Virát-rüpa; and manifestation of
jlvas. (3.5.1-9)                demigods, planets, living entities,
varnas from Virát-rüpa.
Q2: Hearing 3.5.25-26, Vidura
asked: How can the Lord be               A2: Máyá and gunas are just the
connected with gunas? How the              powers of the Lord and beiong to
Part B:        pure soul is engaged in nescience?            Him. Distress of jiva is due to
Sárga           Why jiva suffers, though Lord is            misidentification and it is unreal.
(3.5-11)          situated in his heart? (3.7.2-7)
and
Visarga          Q3: In 3.7, Vidura asked about             A3 (3.8): Appearance of Brahmá,
(3.12)         Vibhútis, visarga, Manus, planets,         3.9-10: Brahmá's prayers and Lord's
varnás'rama, etc. (similar to ParTksit's      reply to him. Brahmá created 14
questions in 2.8).                         planetary systems.
A   A4 (3.10-11): 3.10: Time in generál
Q4: Hearing about 'Time' in 3.8,           and 10 types of creation (6 primary,
Vidura asked about characteristics            3 secondary, 1 mixed). 3.11:
of time. (3.10.10)                  Calculation of time, life spans etc.
Visarga (3.12): Brahma creates 5 features of ignorance, Kumaras, Rúdra,
10 sons, Vák, Sváyambhüva Manu and Satarüpá.
í-
Third Canto at a Glancé
/-         -     ^                               ^
Q 1 : Vidura                A 1 : Brahma asked Manu to heget children
asked about                   and rule the earth. Manu asked him to
Sváyambhüva                  retrieve the earth. Sveta Varáha appeared
Manu's                   from Brahmá's nostril and retrieved earth.
activities                Here Maitreya also narrates Níla Varáha's !
(3.13.2)                          pastime of killing Hiranyáksa.     |
J
Part C:                                                   3.14-16: Events leading to the birth of
Pastimes    ,
Hiranyáksa and Hiranyakasipu (Jaya and
of Lord                                                    Vijaya cursed hy Kumáras and Diti's
Varaha                                                                 pregnancy).
(3.13-19)                 Q2: Vidura
asked about
battle between                         3.17: Birth of Hiranyáksa and
Hiranyáksa and                      Hiranyakasipu, inauspicious omens,
Varába?                       Hiranyáksa challenges Varuna who asks
(3.14.2-4)                             him to approach Lord.
A2 (3.14-19)
3.18-19: Hiranyáksa fights with Varaha.
Varáhadeva kills him.
Q 1 : Vidura again
inquired ahout visarga
A1 (3.20): Visarga in summary -
[What did Brahmá do
Creation of Yaksas, Ráksasas,
after creating
Devatás, Gandharvas, Apsaras,
Prajápatis? How did
Manus, sages etc
Prajápatis create jívas?]
(3.20.9-11)
got Lord's darsana, as per Lord's
prediction, Manu came and offered
Q2: Vidura asks ahout                         Devahüti to Kardama.
Sváyambhuva Manu's
dynasty (3.21.1-5); A2
Part D:                   (3.21-5.15): Manu                      3.23: Kardama was pleased with
Kardama's                had 3 daughters and 2                    Devahüti's service, enjoyed with
household                       sons. Their                       her in a mystic airplane for 100
life                      descendants and                    years. After Devahüti gave birth to
(3.21-24)                   related stories are                 9 daughters, Kardama was ahout to
explained in 3.21-4.1                     leave, hut stayed back upon
(Devahüti), 4.1 (Akuti),                        Devahüti's appeal.
4.1-7 (Prasüti) 4.8-31
(Uttánapáda) and
4.31-5.15 (Priyavrata)                  3.24: Lord Kapila appeared in
V                        2              Devahüti's womb, Brahmá glorified
Kardama and Devahüti. Marriage
of 9 daughters and Kardama's
renunciation.
9*^ií A**
' A * 1 1 '^A*
T
Q l . I am
bewildered by           A3 (3.25.12-27): Adhyatmika yoga (consisting |
Your maya,                 of Sánkhya, Yoga, Bhakti) as solution.    !
please dispel            Superiority of Bhakti. Characteristics of a '.
my illusion.                            devotee.                    \
(3.25.7-11)
A2 (3.25.31-44): Recommends bhakti beyond
Q2. Bhakti to \
modes (hháva-hhakti, spontaneous). For those
attain You :•
easily (3.25.28) i       who are not qualified for it, He recommends
Vaidhi sádhana bhakti.
A3 (3.26-27): 3.26: Kapila descrihes Sánkhya |
- characteristics of prakri, purusa and       |
Q3. Processes              elements, Kárya Srsti and development of j
of jnana
Virát Rüpa. 3.27: Jiva in conditioned state, j
(3.25.29)
Attaining liberation hy intense practice, Prakrti
cannot harm an eniightened soul.
V                                                  J
Part E:
A4 (3.28): Limhs of astáiiga-yoga, Description
Teachings   Q4. Processes ;
of Lord's form for dhárana, Limh-hy-limh
of Lord       of yoga    h
description of Lord's form for dhyána,
Kapila to     (3.25.29)
Devahüti                                        Understanding of a yogí.
(3.25-33)
Q5. Path of                 A5 (3.29): Various classes of bhakti,
Bhakti in detail r       characterstics of pure bhakti, atigas of bhakti,
(3.29.1)                           dangers of offences.
Q6. Nature of ^
time (3.29.4)               A6 (3.29.38-45): Characterstics of time
N
A7 (3.30-32): 3.30: The pains in youth, old
age, death and hell of materially attached
Q7. Continual
persons. 3.31: The pains in the womb, at birth,
birth and death
as an infant, and as a child. Prayers of jiva
of jívas (3.29.3)1
within womb. 3.32: Criticism of sakáma karma
and superiority of hhakti-yoga.
3.33: Devahüti's prayers. Lord Kapila's final instructions, Devahüti
follows those instructions and perfects her life.
mm   Í   M                                             MMMMmM^
•MM
3.1 Questions By Vidura
V
3.1 QUESTIONS BY VIDURA
1-2: Sukadeva Gosvami spoke
1-5: Vidura's renunciation I /     about  Vidura renouncing home
and Mahárája Pariksit's        :                                  ~~
inquisitiveness          i 3-4: Pariksit inquired ahout Vidura-
J                Maitreya samváda
6-9: Atrocities of Dhrtarastra and
party
6-16: Circumstances                 10-13: Vidura's advice to
leading to Vidura's leaving                   Dhrtarástra
Hastinápura          \
14-16: Duryodhana insulted Vidura
and Vidura left the palace consid-
ering it an act of Lord's máyá.
17-19: Travelled to different places
like Prahhása, places on the hank of
/     Sarasvati, visited temples and
deities of Lord Visnu
17-25: Vidura's travel to
pilgrimages                20-23: At Prabhasa, Vidura came to
know that all his relatives died j
24-25: Vidura met Uddhava at the I
hank of Yamuná
26-35: Ahout Kfsna-Balarama and
the Yadus
26-42: Vidura's inquiries \ /
from Uddhava ahout the L
36-40: Ahout the Kurus
welfare of Yadus and
Kurus
41-42: Vidura's lamentation for
Dhrtarástra
43-45: Vidura's request to        Krsna descended to attract all, and
hear ahout Krsna               to show mercy to His devotees
Canto 3 Overview ^ ^ • r j r A ' ' Í g í í ] í
L i n k Canto 2     Canto 3: At the end of Second Canto, Sukadeva Gosvámi was going
to explain about Pádma-kalpa          to Mahárája    Pariksit (2.10.47). However, Saunaka Rsi
inquired about the topics of Vidura's leaving home, his pilgrimage and             conversation
with Maitreya Rsi (2.10.48-50), which the sages had heard in 1.13.1. So Süta           Gosvámi
replied by quoting Sukadeva Gosvámi            who had already explained this subject matter
in response to Mahárája      Pariksit's similar inquires to that of Saunaka Rsi.
1 -5: VIDURA'S RENUNCIATION AND MAHÁRÁJA PARIKSIT'S INQUISITIVENESS
L i n k : Sukadeva Gosvámi,     considering that the questions of Pariksit were      previously
asked by Vidura to Maitreya,        started to narrate the events leading to the   conversation
between Vidura and        Maitreya.
1. Previously Vidura renounced his prosperous home and entered the forest where he
met Maitreya Rsi and asked this question.
2. The Pándavas house was considered by Lord Krsna as H i s own and entered it
without invitation, neglecting tbe bouse of Duryodbana.
3. Mahárája Pariksit asked: "Kindly describe wbere and wben did tbe discussion
between Vidura and Maitreya take place?
4. Questions by saintly Vidura (amalátmanah) must bave been: (i) na hy alpártha -
not unimportant or insignificant, (ii) variyasi - bigbly purposeful and (iii) sádhu-váda
- approved by tbe learned circles or praised by Maitreya."
na hy alpárthodayas tasya            vidurasyámalátmanah
tasmin variyasi prasnah           sádhu-vádopabrrhhitah
5. Being pleased by Pariksit's questions, tbe great sage {rsi varya) and bigbly
experienced (subahu-vit) Sukadeva Gosvámi said, "Please beat attentively."
I       6-16: CIRCUMSTANCES LEADING TO VIDURA'S LEAVING HASTINÁPURA
6-9: Atrocities Of Dhrtarástra And Party
6. Blinded (vinasta-drstih) by tbe impious desire to nourisb bis dishonest (asádhün)
sons, Dhrtarástra set fire to tbe lacquer bouse to burn bis fatberless nepbews, tbe
Pándavas.
7. Dhrtarástra did not forbid Duhsásana's abominable act (garhyam) oí dragging
Draupadi by bair into tbe assembly, although sbe was weeping.
mMfiMMMm€m                                             3.1 Questions By Vidura
8. Dhrtarastra and party cheated Yudhisthira, who was born without any enemy
[ajáta-satru) in gambling and later ref used bis rigbtful sbare of tbe kingdom.
9. Dbrtarástra (or Duryodbana) wbo lost even tbe last farthing of piety (ksata-punya-
lesah) didn't respect tbe nectarean words (amrta-ayanáni) oí Lord Krsna, guru of tbe
universe (jagad-guru).
10-13: Vidura's Advice To Dhrtarástra
10. On being invited by Dbrtarástra for consultation, tbe expert advisor Vidura spoke
as follows.
11. " R e t u r n their legitimate sbare to tbe Pándavas wbo tolerated your offenses. You
are fearful of tbe revengeful Bbima wbo is breatbing like a snake.
12. L o r d K r s n a is on their side, and all tbe Kings and tbe Yadus are with Krsna.
L i n k : Dhrtarastra   may argue: "But my son Duryodhana will oppose this."
13. Get rid of your son Duryodbana for tbe benefit of tbe family. He is offense
personified (dosah), envious of Lord Krsna (purusa-dvid, krsndd vimukho) and causes
inauspiciousness."
14-16: Duryodhana Insulted Vidura
14. Duryodbana was swollen with anger and with lips trembling, insulted Vidura
wbose desirable qualities {sprhaniya-silah) are esteemed by respectable people.
15. "Wbo called tbis son of maidservant (ddst-putra) here? He betrays those upon
wbom be subsisted and spies in tbe enemy's interest. Drive bim from tbe palace with
only bis breatb."
16. Struck by tbe sbarp words, piacing bis bow on tbe door, Vidura left bis brotber's
palace without being sorry {gata vyatah), considering tbe acts of Lord's máyá to be
supreme.
Note: Vidura understood the influence of Lord's 'external' energy on Duryodhana
who was heading towards his own ruination. And he saw how Lord's 'internál'
energy was helping him to engage fully in devotional service.
L i n k : Vidura is highly elevated and pious, yet he thought that he lost his piety by the
association of the diplomatic Dhrtarástra      and Duryodhana and not fit to associate
with the Lord at once. Therefore, although Lord Krsna was personally present in the
world at that time, Vidura did not approach Him directly,        but decided to travel to
holy places to achieve greater piety in order to advance nearer to the Lord.
mmmMiMM
B       Canto 3 Overview                      t^flt^éf€2féí''^t^^
17-25:     VIDURA'S TRAVELS To PILGRIMAGES
17. T o get higher pious credits, Vidura travelled to holy places where many deities
were situated.
18. He travelled alone, thinking only of Krsna, in many places like cities, orchards,
villages etc, where different deities of the Lord exist.
19. Vidura's ideál conduct as a pilgrim - pure (medhya), independent in occupation
(vivikta-vrttih), always sanctified (sadapluto), sleeping on the earth (adhah sayano),
dressed as mendicant (avadhüta veso), unseen by relatives (alaksitah), alone (svair),
and performed vows (vratáni cere) only to please Lord Hari (hari-tosandni).
20. Vidura thus reacbed Prabbásaksetra. At that time Mahárája Yudhisthira gained
control over tbe entire earth.
21. At Prabbása, Vidura came to know that all bis relatives had died, just as an entire
forest is burnt due to fire produced by tbe friction of bamboos. I n grief, be silently
proceeded west.
22. Vidura visited all tbe I I places of pilgrimage on tbe bank of tbe River Sarasvati.
23. He also visited many temples and deities of Lord Visnu established by great souls.
24-25: Vidura met Uddhava
24. Passing through various provinces, Vidura finally reacbed tbe bank of tbe
Yamuná wbere be met Uddhava.
25. Vidura affectionately embraced Uddhava, tbe disciple of Brbaspati and friend of
Lord Krsna, and inquired as follows.
L i n k : The welfare of the devotees depends on the situation of the Lord. So, Vidura
asks about the Lord(s)   first.
26. Are tbe originál Personalities of Godhead (Krsna and Balaráma) wbo descended
on tbe request of lord Brahmá doing well in tbe bouse of Sürasena?
27-35: Inquiries about Yadus - H o w are Vasúdévá, Pradyumna, Ugrasena, Sámba,
Yuyudbána, Akrüra, Devaki, Aniruddba, Hrdika, Cárudesna, Gada and others?
36-40: Inquiries about K u r u s - H o w are the Pándavas and Kunti?
Note: Vidura also described each of these personalities briefly by quoting an incident
or an activity that they did. áríla Prabhupáda elaborates on them with backstories
and lessons.
WtímMWmmmm€MMí€mm
41. I simply lament for Dhrtarástra - who drove me out although I am his sincere
well-wisher.
42. But I am happily travelling and not astonished at this action of Lord's máyá,
which bewilders people in generál, because I know Lord's greatness by His grace.
43. Although Lord Krsna is always willing to relieve tbe distress of surrendered
devotees (prapannárti-jihirsaya)   and saw tbe kings going astray by three kinds of
pride (tri-madotpathánám      - wealtb, education and followers), He refrained from
personally killing the K u r u s immediately.
Note: But that does not mean that He excused their offenses. He waited to get them
together on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra and kill them all at one time (short-cut
killing mission) and make His devotee Arjuna the hero of the battle.
L i n k : "Why should the Supreme Lord full of knowledge and bliss involve himself in
the matériái world of sin and   piety?"
44. T w o reasons for Lord's appearance -
(i) Unborn Lord takes birth {ajasya janma) to kill tbe wicked (utpatha-násanáya).
(ii) Altbougb without action (karmany akartur). He acts to attract all kinds of
people (grahanáya purhsám) - karmis, jnánis and bhaktas.
Otberwise wby would tbe transcendental Lord come to tbe earth? [Even His pure
devotee has no connection with matériái body. He is not like ordinary living entity
wbo is forced to take birth by karma.]
45. He mercifully appeared in tbe family of tbe Yadus to show mercy to tbe
surrendered rulers. Therefore, please cbant tbe glories of tbe Lord, wbo is glorified in
boly places (kirtaya tirtha-kirteh). [ I batbed in almost all boly places, now batbe me
in tbe boliest place; Krsna].
Canto 3 Overview
3 . 2 REMEMBRANCE O F LORD KRSNA
f
1-2: Sukadeva Gosvami spoke about
1-5: Vidura's                  Vidura renouncing home
renunciation and
Mahárája Pariksit's
inquisitiveness            3-4: Pariksit inquired about Vidura-
Maitreya samváda
6-9: Atrocities of Dhrtarastra and partyj
6-16: Circumstances          10-13: Vidura's advice to Dhrtarastra
leading to Vidura's
leaving Hastinápura         14-16: Duryodhana insulted Vidura and
Vidura left the palace considering it an
act of Lord's máyá.
17-19: Travelled to different places likej
Prabhasa, places on the bank of       |
Sarasvati, visited temples and deities of |
Lord Visnu
3.2
17-25: Vidura's travel to
Remembrance                pilgrimages             20-23: At Prabhasa, Vidura came to
of Lord Krsna                                         know that all his relatives died
24-25: Vidura met Uddhava at the
bank of Yamuná
26-35: About Krsna-Balarama and the
Yadus
26-42: Vidura's
inquiries from Uddhava
about the welfare of               36-40: About the Kurus
Yadus and Kurus
41-42: Vidura's lamentation for
Dhrtarástra
43-45: Vidura's request i_    Krsna descended to attract all, and to
to hear about Krsna f            show mercy to His devotees
Slír-ÖHÍÍ                                              3.2 Remembrance of Lord Krsna
L i n k : Uddhava replies to Vidura's   inquiries.
1-6: UDDHAVA'S EXALTED POSITION
1. w h e n Vidura inquired about his dearest Lord Krsna, Uddhava couldn't reply due
to excessive anxiety (autkanthyat) at the remembrance of tbe Lord.
2. In bis cbildbood Uddhava was so absorbed in worsbiping tbe deity of Krsna, tbat
wben bis mother called bim for breakfast, be did not wisb to bave it.
3. No satiation i n transcendental service - Uddhava's devotion did not slacken even
in old age. Wben asked about tbe Lord's message, be at once remembered Lord's
lotus feet (bhartuh pádáv     anusmaran).
4. Ecstatic symptoms - Uddhava remained silent for a muhúrta                (48 minutes). His
devotional ecstasy appeared increasing as be became submerged (nimagnah) in tbe
sweetness of Krsna's lotus feet (krsnánghri-sudhayá)      in separation.
5. Seeing tbe symptoms of Uddhava's bliss (bodily transformations and tears of
separation), Vidura could understand tbat be perfected bis love for tbe Lord.
L i n k : By his constant remembrance      of Lord Krsna,    Uddhava always lives in the
Lord's abode,   Dváraká.
6. Uddhava soon came back from tbe Lord's abode, to tbe buman pláne (external
consciousness) and spoke to Vidura in a pleasing mood.
L i n k : Out of sympathy, Uddhava first brings out the philosophical conclusion in order
to pacify Vidura, who was overcome with grief.
7. Krsna sun (Krsna-dyumani)    bas set and our bouse bas been swallowed by tbe
snake of time. Wbat can I speak about our welfare?
mMmCanto 3 Overview
Sun and Sunset                                Krsna and His Disappearance
Sun appears in the morning and gradually Krsna disappears in one universe and
rises to the meridián and sets in one simultaneously appears in another universe
hemisphere while simultaneously rising in and performs His pastimes eternally
another hemisphere.                       (nitya-lilá)
Sun rises once in 24 hours                    Krsna appears once in a day of Brahma
Sunset: World becomes dark, snakes become     Krsna's disappearance: Universe is put into
powerful, ghosts become active, lotus is      darkness, atheists feel enlivened and
disfigured, and cakraváki laments.            devotees become sorry.
8. This universe is most unfortunate and the Yadus are even more unfortunate as
they could not identify Lord Hari as the Personality of Godhead just as fish considers
moon as one amongst them, or something illuminating and nothing more (considering
that both tbe fisb and tbe moon took birtb from tbe ocean).
9. Altbougb Yadus were bigbly learned and experts in psycbic study, tbey could
understand tbe Lord only partially - as Paramátmá, and not as Bhagaván.
L i n k : Still Yadus are glorious, because they had the opportunity to associate with the
Lord and sérve Him. Such devotees are different from atheistic people.
10. Tbe intelligence of tbe surrendered devotees is nevet affected by tbe words of
tbose bewildered by tbe illusory energy of tbe Lord.
devasya máyayá sprstá    ye cányad  asad-ásritáh
bhrámyate dhir na tad-vdkyair    dtmany uptdtmano harau
11. Tbe Lord manifested His eternal form and removed it from tbe sigbt of tbose wbo
bave not executed required penance (atapta-tapasdm)...
•   and are not satisfied in tbeir attempts to satisfy tbeir senses (avitrpta-drsdm).
•   but attained tbe Lord's mercy and developed a craving to see His form (avitrpta-
drsdm).
12. Tbe Lord appeared by His internál potency, in His eternal form, wbicb is just
suitable for buman pastimes tbat astonish even Lord Visnu. Tbus H i s form is tbe
ornament of all ornaments.
?£'áí%^fáÍ%%'áí%*'fái%7£'áí'^J^Í^m                    3.2 Remembrance of Lord Krsna                 |
yan martya-lilaupayikam sva-yoga-
máyá-balarh darsayatá grhitam
vismápanam svasya ca saubhagarddheh
páram padam       bhúsana-bhüsanángam
link:   Uddhava     reminded     Vidura,    "You    have   directly   witnessed    the   great
auspiciousness of Krsna "
13. A l l the demigods assembled at tbe Rájasüya yajna concluded tbat tbe auspicious
beauty of Krsna surpassed tbe dexterity of Brahma in creating beautiful objects.
L i n k : But the attraction of the gopis is superior to that of the demigods!       Uddhava
speaks this out of his own experience in Vraja, having seen their love. (SB 10.46-47)
14. Gopis, after tbeir pastimes witb Krsna were anguisbed wben He left tbem. Tbey
used to follow H i m witb tbeir eyes, sat down witb tbeir intelligence stunned and tbey
couldn't finisb tbeir household duties.
15-24:   LORD KRSNA'S MERCY AND HIS BEWILDERING ACTIVITIES
15. Altbougb tbe Lord is unborn (aja). He compassionately [anukampitátmá) appears
along witb His mahad (Mabá-visnu wbo creates mahat-tattva) and amsas (like
Matsya and Kürma), wben His peaceful devotees (like Vasúdévá) are barassed by
nondevotees (like Karhsa).
16. Tbese bewildering (apparently contradictory) acts of Krsna give me distress -
(i) Altbougb unborn He took birtb (ajasya-janma)
(ii) He lived in Vraja out of fear of enemy (vraje váso ari-bbayád)
(iii) Tbougb all-powerful (ananta viryah). He fled from Matburá (purdd            vyavdtsid)
Note: Because the Lord is all-powerful (and not like one of us), it is possible for Him
to adjust opposites.
17. Lord Krsna begged pardon from His parents for His inability to sérve tbem due to
fear of Karhsa. All tbis bebaviour pains my beart.
18. Wbo, after smelling tbe dust of His lotus feet even once, could evet forget it?
Simply by raising His eyebrows. He reduced tbe burden of tbe eartb.
L i n k : Uddhava remembers the magnanimity of the Lord who is merciful even to the
enemies (Verses 19, 20 and 23).
19. Mercy given to Sis'upála - Wbo can tolerate separation from all merciful Lord
Krsna, wbo gave envious Sisupála liberation, wbicb is aspired by tbe yogis.
Canto 3   OvervieJHBjjTlíTtgriri^^^^
^^^^^*;d53.y*^^33^_^
20. Others, on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra attained Krsna's abode by being
purified by tbe arrows of Arjuna, and drinking witb tbeir eyes tbe lotus face of
Krsna.
tathaiva cánye nara-loka-vird
ya dhave krsna-mukhdravindam
netraih pibanto nayandbhirdmarh
pdrthdstra-pütah padam dpur asya
21. Unparalleled qualities of the Lord
•   asdmya atisaya —>• No one is equal or superior to H i m
•   tryadhisah —>• Master of all kinds of Tbrees (3 principal potencies, 3 pairs of
opulences, 3 purusdvatdras, 3 gundvatdras, 3 modes, 3 worlds)
•   svdrdjya laksmy-dpta-samasta-kdmah            Supremely independent and all His
desires are fulfilled as He is tbe busband of goddess of fortune.
•   balirh haradbhis cira-loka-pdlaih       He is worsbiped by tbe eternal maintainers
of tbe creation witb various parapbernalia.
•   kirita-koty-edita-pdda-pithah    —> His feet are bonoured by millions of belmets
tbat toucb tbem.
L i n k : Although the Lord is powerful. He still submits before Ugrasena
22. It is painful to remember tbe Lord submitting explanations before Ugrasena.
23. Mercy given to Pütaná - Krsna gave tbe position of motberly nurse (dhdtry-
ucitdm) to tbe envious (jighdmsayd) and unfaitbful (asddhvi) Pütaná (baki) wbo came
to kill H i m witb bet poisoned breast (stana-kdla-kütam). H o w sball I take shelter of
one more merciful tban Him?
aho baki yam     stana-kdla-kütam
jighdmsaydpdyayad apy asddhvi
lebhe gatirh dhdtry-ucitdth tato 'nyam
kam vd daydlum saranarh vrajema
24. I consider tbe demons to be devotees because wbile fighting in enmity, tbey are
absorbed in tbe tbougbt of tbe Lord (abhinivista-cittdn) in anger and wbile dying
tbey are able to see tbe Lord on Garuda witb cakra.
L i n k : Although there is no difference between the Lord's pastimes of appearance and
disappearance, devotees do not generally discuss about His disappearance.     Therefore,
Uddhava began narrating     the pastimes of Krsna from His birth, although       Vidura
inquired him about the Lord's   disappearance.
25. Krsna was born to Vasúdévá and Devaki at tbe request of Brabmá for tbe welfare
of tbe eartb.
26. Out of fear of Karhsa, Vasúdévá brougbt Krsna to Vrndavana, wbere tbe Lord
stayed witb Baladeva for eleven years like a covered flame.
27. Krsna performed pastimes in Vraja's beautiful forests and on tbe banks of tbe
Yamuná in tbe association of cowberd boys and cows.
28. Lord Krsna displayed tbe activities of a cbild to tbe Vrajavásis [preksaniydm
vrajaukasdm). And wben tbe demons attacked. He appeared as if struck witb
wonder, but killed tbem like a lion cub (bdla-simha).
29. Wbile berding tbe cows and buUs (sita-go-vrsam/ go-dhanam), Krsna, tbe
reservoir of all opulences [laksmyd niketam) played on His wonderful flute and
enlivened tbe gopas.
30. In tbe course of His pastimes, Krsna casually killed all tbe kdma-rüpi   demons sent
by Karnsa as easily as a cbild breaks doUs.
31. Lord cbastised and drove away Káliya, and made tbe cows drink tbe poison free
Yamuna waters.
32-33. Krsna desired to utilize Nanda Mahárája's wealtb for worsbiping tbe cows
and tbus gave a lesson to Indra by stopping Indra-püjá. Wben Indra poured water
incessantly on Vrndávana, tbe compassionate Lord saved tbe Vrajavásis by lifting
Govardbana like an umbrella.
34. Krsna performed rdsa-lüd pastimes, as tbe central beauty of tbe assembly of
women [mandala-mandanah), by attracting tbe gopis witb His flute in tbe moonlit
autumn nigbt.
3 . 3 T H E LORD'S PASTIMES O U T O F VRNDAVANA
1: Krsna killed Karhsa
2: Krsna learned all the Vedas from
Sándípani Muni.
1-9: Kfsna's
education and         3-5: Krsna married Rukminl, Nágnajit1,í
brought párijáta for SatyabhamáJ
marriage
6-9: Krsna killed Narakasura, married
kidnapped princesses and begot
children from them.
10-11: Lord and His associates killed
many demons like Sambara, Dvivida,
Bána, Mura, Balvala, etc.
10-15: Killing of
demons and                   12-13: Kuruksetra war
Kuruksetra war
14-15: Lord planned for the
departure of Yadus
3.3 The Lord's
pastimes out of                            16-18: Krsna established Yudhisthira
as the emperor, induced him to do \
Vrndávana                                three horse sacrifices and protected j
Pariksit.
19-22: Lord enjoyed life in Dváraká, |
16-23: Krsna in        followed Vedic customs, situated in i
Dváraká               knowledge and finally exhibited
detachment.
23: Only devotees can understand
the Lord's activities
24: By Lord's will, the sages cursed
24-28: Events leading                   Yadus
to the annihilation of     25-28: Yadus went to Prabhása-
the Yadus            ksetra, engaged in rituals and gave
charity to brahmanas
m:mjMmMm€mMm:mmmim
I
-        .i.iWi|WM«W»»lW.ip«ltl.i|IW^
3.3 The Lord's Pastimes Out Of Vrndávana
L i n k : Uddhava continues to narrate pastimes of Lord in Mathurá and     Dváraká.
1-9: KRSNA'S EDUCATION AND MARRIAGES
1. K i l l i n g Kaihsa - T o give happiness to Their parents, Krsna and Balaráma went to
Mathurá and killed Karhsa and dragged his body to reassure tbem.
2. Education - Tbe Lord learned all tbe Vedas and tbeir six angas from Sándípani
Muni by bearing only once and rewarded bim by bringing back bis dead son from tbe
Yamaloka.
3. Lord Krsna, stepping over tbe otber bopeful princes and kings, kidnapped
Rukminí away as His own sbare, just as Garuda carried away nectar.
4. Lord won over tbe princess Nágnajití by subduing seven buUs. Wben His
competitors attacked H i m , He wounded or killed tbem.
5. T o please His dear wife Satyabbámá, Krsna, brougbt tbe párijáta tree from
beaven, but Indra, being a benpecked busband, tried to figbt witb tbe Lord.
6-7.   Lord killed tbe démon Narakasura, tbe son of Dbaritri and established
Narakásura's son, Bbagadatta, as tbe king. A l l tbe princesses kidnapped by
Narakásura are enlivened upon seeing tbe árta-bandhu,     Krsna and witb eagerness, joy
and sbyness, offered tbemselves to be H i s wives.
8-9. Tbe Lord expanded into many forms exactly matching eacb and every princess
and accepted tbeir bands simultaneously, in eacb of tbe palaces, by His internál
potency. Krsna begot in eacb and every one of tbem ten offspring exactly like
Himself.
10-15:   KILLING OF DEMONS AND KURUKSETRA WAR
10. Kálayavana, Jarásandba and Sálva attacked tbe Lord's city, but tbe Lord
refrained from killing tbem personally, just to give fame to H i s devotees
(Mucukunda, Bbima and others).
11. Sambara, Dvivida, Bána, Mura, Balvala, Dantavakra and many others were killed
by Krsna and His men. (Pradyumna killed Sambara. Balaráma killed Dvivida and
Balvala.)
12. Tbe Lord arranged for tbe killing of tbe strong kings wbose armies made tbe
eartb tremble, in tbe Battle of Kuruksetra.
mMMM.MmMMMMMMMmim:mimm.B:
Canto 3 Overview - , ^ , , , , ^ ; j T | C
13. Duryodhana was bereft of bis good fortune because of tbe ill advice of bis
associates - Karna, Duhsásana and Sakuni. L o r d was not bappy to see Duryodbana
lying on tbe ground witb broken tbigbs.
L i n k : Why Lord Krsna was not happy?
•   Reason 1: Because all living entities are His parts and parcels and Krsna doesn't
rejoice to see them suffer.
•   Reason 2: Because the intolerable strength of the Yadus still remained on the
earth.
14. Altbougb tbe eighteen aksauhinis of army is destroyed in tbe Kuruksetra war,
Krsna considered tbat tbe Yadus are still an unbearable burden for tbe eartb
(factually, it's a burden of love).
L i n k : But the Yadus cannot be destroyed like others!
15. Tbe Lord planned and predicted tbe disappearance of tbe Yadus - "Tbey will
disappear only wben I disappear or wben I want tbem to disappear by quarrelling
among tbemselves in intoxication."
16. Thinking like tbis, Lord Krsna established Mahárája Yudhisthira as tbe emperor
of tbe eartb, to show tbe ideál of administration.
17. Krsna protected tbe embryo of Uttará from tbe weapon of Asvattbámá.
18. Krsna induced Mahárája Yudhisthira to perform tbree borsé sacrifices, wbo ruled
tbe eartb following Krsna's advice, assisted by bis younger brotbers.
19. T w o of the Lord's opulences - Simultaneously, Krsna (bhagaván)   enjoyed life in
Dváraká, following tbe Vedic and social customs and was situated in detachment
(vairágya) and knowledge of Sánkhya (jnána).                                             1
20-21. By bis...                                                                         !
•    snigdha-smitávalokena  —> affectionate smiles and glances,
•    vácá piyüsa-kalpayá    nectarean words,
•    caritrenánavadyena     flawless character,
•    sri-niketena cátmaná —> and transcendental body, tbe residence of Laksmi, tbe
Lord enjoyed His pastimes in tbe association of tbe Yadus. And at nigbt. He
enjoyed conjugal love witb His queens.
22. Tbus after being engaged in bousebold life for many years, tbe Lord exhibited
detachment.
3.3 The Lord's Pastimes Out Of Vrndavana
23. Every one's sense enjoyment is under the control of daiva. Such a person, unless
he is a devotee, cannot put faith in the Lord's transcendental sense activities.
daivadhinesu kamesu daivadhinah svayam pumán
ko visrambheta yogena yogesvaram anuvratah
m
24. Once the princes of the Yadu and Bhoja dynasties made the great sages angry
with their joking. Thus, as desired by tbe Lord, tbe sages cursed tbem.
25. Bewildered by Krsna [deva vimohitah), tbe devata portions of tbe Vrsnis went to
Prabbása-ksetra, wbile His eternal devotees remained in Dváraká.
26-27. At Prabbása, Yadus took batb, offered respects to forefathers, demigods and
sages. Tbey gave cows, gold, bedding, clotbing, animal-skin seats, blankets, borses,
elepbants, brides and land in charity to tbe brahmanas.
28. Yadus offered tbe brahmanas delicious prasádam          (bhagavad-arpanam)      and
obeisances. Tbey lived perfectly by protecting tbe cows and tbe brahmanas.
¥.mMM.MMMM.Mm'M.MMMM.mm
Canto 3 Overvie'
3 . 4 VIDURA APPROACHES MAITREYA
Yadus drank liquor, became delirious and
1-3: Disappearance
of Yadus              destroyed each other by the influence of
Lord's maya.
4-8: At Dváraká, Lord told Uddhava to go to
Badarikás'rama. But Uddhava followed Him to
Prabhasa and saw Krsna sitting under a
Banyán tree
|4-13: Lord Krsna meti,
Uddhava and      |   9: Maitreya arrived there out of own accord
Maitreya Rsi    p
10-13: Lord was more attentive to Uddhava,
"Knowing your desire for My association, I
award it. This is your last life. I spoke catuh-
s'lokT to Brahmá"
14-18:                15:1 prefer Your service over the four
Overwhelmed                           purusárthas.
Uddhava glorified
and prayed to the       16-17: Your activities bewilder even the wise.
3.4 Vidura                 Lord
18: Kindly explain me the knowledge of
approaches                                                      Yourself.
Maitreya           19-22: Hearing fromj
the Lord, Uddhava        19-20: Lord instructed Uddhava about His
started for     ^                paramárh sthitim.
J
Badarikás'rama 1 \
21-22: To mitigate the separation, Uddhava \
decided to follow the Lord's instruction to gol
23-27: Vidura sought                    to Badarikasrama                1
spiritual knowledge
from Uddhava             Uddhava directed Vidura to Maitreya to
avoid maryádá-vyatikrama.
28-32: Uddhava's |
Krsna decided to depart and thought that
special role after
Uddhava can disseminate the transcendental
I disappearance of theP
knowledge about Him.
Lord
33-36: Vidura's             33-35: Hearing from Uddhava and
enlightenment by        understanding that the Lord remembered him
Uddhava and further            at the last moment, Vidura cries.
journey            36: Finally met Maitreya on bank of Ganges.
Tcrr-Vt
3.4 Vidura Approaches Maitreya
1-3: DISAPPEARANCE OF YADUS
1. W i t h the Lord's permission (tad-anujnata), Yadus ate the remnants and also
drank liquor. They became delirious and used barsb words at eacb otber.
2. Due to intoxication, tbeir minds became unbalanced, and tbey destroyed eacb
otber, just as bamboos by mutual friction create fire and destroy tbe wbole forest.
L i n k : How could the eternal associates of the Lord be vanquished in His presence?
3. Tbis is an action of Lord's máyá (svátma-mdyáyd).    Witnessing tbis. Lord Krsna,
sipped tbe water of tbe River Sarasvati and sat down under a tree.
Note: The devatas who entered into various Yádavas, the Lord's eternal associates,
separated tbemselves from those Yádavas, and came to Prabhása-ksetra. Krsna
wanted them to be dispatched to their respective abodes as the mission of His descent
was accomplished. Further, it was a convincing display for the common people to
think that the Yádavas were destroyed by killing each other.
4. Lord Krsna is tbe vanquisber of distress of surrendered souls         (prapannárti-harena).
Previously (in Dváraká), He told me to go to Badarikásrama.
Note A: Krsna spoke to Uddhava for two reasons (both reasons reflect His quality of
being prapannárti-harena) - (i) He wanted to remove Uddhava's suffering of
separation after the disappearance of the Lord and His family, and (ii) He told
Uddhava to go Badarikásrama to relieve the pain of the sages there, by speaking
about bhakti, jnana, vairágya and the Lord's pastimes [Ref. 3.4.30])
Note B: When the purpose of Krsna's descent (to remove the burden of the earth)
had been fulfilled, the demigods headed by Brahmá came to Dváraká to inform Lord
Krsna that the time for His disappearance had arrived. Realizing the imminent
departure of His beloved Lord, Uddhava approached Krsna and requested that he
may also be allowed to go to spiritual world along with Krsna. Then Krsna spoke to
Uddhava the deepest philosophical section of the Bhágavatam, namely Uddhava-gttá
and finally instructed Uddhava to go to Badarikásrama. (Ref. 11.6 and 11.29).
5. Yet, in spite of knowing His desire, being unable to bear separation from His lotus
feet (páda-vislesandksamah),     I followed H i m (from Dváraká to Prabbása).
6. Searching for my Lord, I saw H i m deeply thinking alone, taking shelter on tbe
bank of tbe River Sarasvati altbougb He is tbe shelter of Laksmi        (sri-niketam).
Canto 3 Overview    ^^^^M^^^^^íM^MM^^^
7. I saw His beautiful form with a glowing dark complexion [syátndvadátath),               full
of bliss and knowledge (virajam),     peaceful reddisb eyes [prasdntdruna-locanam).            I
could recognize H i m as tbe Supreme Lord by His four bands [dorbhis caturbhir) and
yellow silk garments   [pita-kausdmbarena).
8. H i s sitting posture - resting against a young banyán tree (arbhaka asvattham              -
indicates tbis universe is tbe smallest of all; matériái energies are kept to His back)
witb His rigbt lotus foot on His left tbigb. Giving up His pastimes in tbis world
(tyakta-pippalam), He was blissful.
9. At tbat time Maitreya Rsi, a mahd-bhdgavata and tbe friend of Vyása, reacbed
tbere out of bis own perfect accord (Tbe meeting of Maitreya, wbo is not a pure
devotee, witb tbe Lord, is due to bis accidental devotional service or       ajnata-sukrti).
10. Maitreya was attached to Lord Krsna and listening to H i m submissively. Witb a
smile and a particular glancé upon me, having allowed me to rest, tbe Lord spoke as
follows.
Note: Although both Uddhava and Maitreya were great souls, Krsna was more
intimate and attentive towards Uddhava as he was a spotlessly pure devotee while
Maitreya at that time was a jndni-bhakta - one whose devotion is mixed with
monistic viewpoint.
Lord Krsna spoke to Uddhava:
11. O Vasú, I know your beart's desire (manasipsitarh)       for My association           (mat-
siddhi-kdtnena) witb wbicb you worsbiped Me in a sacrifice. I will award you tbat
rare benediction wbicb is difficult for others.
Note: Uddhava is an eternal associate (nitya-siddha) oí the Lord and a plenary
portion of Uddhava was one of the eight Vasus (sddhana-siddha) who entered the
nitya-siddha Uddhava. Here Uddhava is revealed as sddhana-siddha to protect the
confidentiality of his pastimes. Also the Lord is indicating to Maitreya, the
importance of association of the Lord.
12. Your present life is tbe last; now you can go to Vaikuntha. Your visit to Me in
tbis lonely place, wben I am about to disappear from tbe vision of tbis world, is
because of your pure devotional service and is a great boon for you.
13. At tbe beginning of tbe creation, I spoke unto Brabmá about M y transcendental
glories, wbicb tbe sages describe as Srimad-Bhágavatam      [catuh-sloki).
3.4 Vidura Approaches Maitreya
14. Uddhava to V i d u r a : I was overwhelmed by tbe Lord's reciprocation, my words
failed in tears and my bairs erupted. Smearing my tears, witb földed bands, I spoke.
Uddhava to the Lord:
15. I prefer Y o u r service, not four purusárthas - Devotees wbo engage in Your
loving service, bave no difficulty in acbieving anytbing including liberation. But I am
anxious only to sérve Your lotus feet.
ko nv isa te   páda-saroja-bhájárh
sudurlabho 'rthesu catursv apiha
tathdpi ndharh pravrnomi bhüman
bhavat-paddmbhoja-nisevanotsukah
16. Contradictions in Y o u - Tbe intelligence of even tbe learned sages become
disturbed {khidyati dhir viddm) by Your activities...
1.     karmdny anihasya        Y o u engage in fruitive work, altbougb Y o u are free
from all desires
2.     bhavo abhavasya —>• You take birtb, altbougb You are unborn
3.     durgdsrayo 'thdri-bhaydt paldyanam kdldtmano —> You flee in fear of enemy
and take shelter of a fórt, altbougb Y o u are tbe controUer of invincible time
4.     pramadd-yutdsramah svdtman-rateh —>• You enjoy bousebolder life witb
many women, altbougb Y o u enjoy in Yourself
17. You called upon me for consultation, as if bewildered, altbougb You are never
bewildered. Tbis act of Yours bewilders me.
18. If You tbink I am competent, kindly explain tbe knowledge of Yourself wbicb
You bave spoken to Brabmá (3.4.13; and also tbat wbicb solves all tbe above
contradictions). By tbat I will cross over tbis ocean of sorrow (after Your
disappearance).
Uddhava to Vidura:
19. Wben I expressed my beartfelt desires, tbe lotus eyed Lord instructed me about
His transcendental situation [paramdth sthitim).
Note: Lord's paramdth sthitim includes what He did not speak to Brahmá in catuh-
sloki- His inconceivable pastimes and dealings with His devotees in Dváraká and
Vrndávana.
WMMMimWmMWmMWMM
^^^HHP   Canto 3 Overview  Wt^^ií''t2^^y^2^if^^
^f/lll//g*yyyp'-*[j^^33^
20. I have studied the path of self-knowledge (paramdm sthitim) from the Lord and
after that I have come here, very much aggrieved due to separation.
L i n k : How will Uddhava live in such a pain of separation?
21. Service mitigates separation - I am now mad for the pleasure of seeing the Lord,
and to mitigate this I am now proceeding to Badarikásrama for association, as I have
been instructed by H i m .
22. In Badarikásrama, Nara-Náráyana sages, bave been undergoing penance for tbe
welfare of all.
23-27:     VIDURA SOUGHT SPIRITUAL KNOWLEDGE FROM UDDHAVA
23. Knowledge mitigates grief - After bearing about tbe annihilation of relatives,
Vidura pacified bis overwhelming hereavement by dint of bis transcendental
knowledge (tbat Uddhava spoke from 3.2.7).
24. Wbile mahd-bhdgavata Uddhava was going away, kauravarsabha                    Vidura
questioned bim in affection and confidence.
Vidura to Uddhava:
25. Devotees wander to deliver - Because tbe servants of Visnu wander in tbe
interest of serving others (visnor bhrtydh sva-bhrtydrtha-krtas   caranti), so you kindly
describe tbe self-knowledge witb wbicb you bave been eniightened by tbe Lord.
L i n k : Although   competent,   Uddhava   was   not   ready to accept the elder     and
respectable Vidura as his disciple, especially when the elderly Maitreya     was nearby.
And he was careful about the offense of maryddd-vyatikrama,             or   impertinently
surpassing a greater personality.
26. Uddhava to V i d u r a : Y o u may take lessons from tbe great learned sage Maitreya.
He was also directly instructed by tbe Lord.
27. After discussing witb Vidura about tbe Lord's qualities, Uddhava spent tbe nigbt,
wbicb passed like a moment, on tbe bank of tbe Yamuná and then departed in tbe
morning.
28. Pariksit Mahárája: Wby did Uddhava remain alone on tbis planet after tbe
disappearance of tbe Lord and His associates?
3.4 Vidura Approaches Maitreya
29. Sukadeva Gosvami: Lord Krsna desired to disappear from the earth after
dispatching His excessively numerous family members in tbe plea of tbe sages' curse.
Note: Krsna does not give up His body like the ordinary conditioned souls. His hody
and His self are identical. He appears and disappears out of His own will and potency
as repeatedly confirmed hy the scriptures and acaryas.
3 0 - 3 1 : Lord Krsna thought to Himself:
30. Uddhava, tbe foremost of M y devotees, is tbe only one wbo can be entrusted
witb knowledge about Me (jnánarh         mad-ásrayam).
31. Uddhava is not inferior to M e in any way, because be is never affected by mdyd
(gunair ndrditah - specific qualification of tbe representative of tbe Lord). Therefore
be may remain here to disseminate specific knowledge about Me.
32.   Uddhava followed tbe        instructions of    tbe   Lord   (tri-loka-guru),   reacbed
Badarikásrama and worsbipped tbe Lord in trance.
33-34. Vidura beard from Uddhava, about tbe Lord's appearance, activities and
disappearance. Tbe Lord's glorious activities increase tbe perseverance of tbe
intelligent {dhirdndrh    dhairya-vardhanam) and is incomprebensible for tbe
unintelligent wbo are like beasts.
35. Understanding tbat be was remembered by Lord Krsna, Vidura began to cry
loudly, overwhelmed by tbe ecstasy of love.
Note: In 3.5.21 also Maitreya informed Vidura, "The Lord had instructed me to
speak the confidential knowledge to you."
36. Vidura reacbed tbe bank of tbe Ganges, wbere tbe great sage Maitreya was
situated.
Canto 3 Overvie     mmmmmmmmm
3 . 5 VIDURA'S TALKS W I T H MAITREYA
2: How to live for real happiness?
3-4: Devotees travel to show
1-9: Vidura's                  compassion on fallen souls.
questions to
Maitreya Rsi               5-9: Describe ahout Purusa-avatáras,
Virat-rupa, iTlá-avatáras, living
conditions on different planets and
different living entities
10:1 am satiated with hearing
Maháhhárata.
10-16: Vidura's            11-15: Describe only Krsna-Kathá that
exclusive interest in            vanquishes miseries, increases
Krsna-Kathá               detachment, creates auspiciousness
and is the essesnce of all topics
16: Start with Purusa-avatáras.
3.5 Vidura's
talks with       17-21: Maitreya Rsi
You are the son of Vyásadeva; You are
Maitreya          honored Vidura
Yamarája himself; the Lord left
and expressed
instructions with me for you
gratitude
Lord, who existed prior to the creation
22-38: Maitreya Rsi             glanced on matériái nature which
described the \-            underwent various transformations
process of creation I         under the influence of time and gave
rise to the 23 elements
39-43: Glorious shelter of Lord's lotus
feet
39-51: Elemental 1 / f         44-47: Qualified and unqualified
demigods offered ih-—_ ,|     candidates for the shelter of Lord's
prayers to the Lord •                      lotus feet.
48-51: Prayers for enlightenment and
directions
WMMMMmMBÍ                                         3.5 Vidura's Talks With Maitreya
Note: 3.1-4 described the nature of the Supreme Lord, the shelter of creatiou (angi).
Now iu 3.5, Maitreya hegius the topic of sárga, the primary creatiou (anga).
9:   VIDURA'S QUESTIONS TO MAITREYA Rspp|PPPPPP||
1. Vidura who had perfected his devotional service            {acyuta-bháva-siddhah)
approached Maitreya Rsi at Hardwar and inquired from him as follows.
L i n k : Vidura, out of his natural humility   did not inquire from Maitreya            directly
about the Lord's form, pastimes etc, but inquired into a subject more relevant to the
common man. Further, as he heard from Uddhava (3.4.10) that the Lord                 particularly
spoke to Uddhava, he did not want to ask Maitreya         about higher topics and waited
for Maitreya to explain them on his own.
2. In this world everyone is engaged in fruitive activities [karma) for happiness, but
tbey find neitber happiness [sukharh) nor satiation or detachment          [upáramarh).
Rather, tbey increase tbeir suffering [duhkhath). Please, therefore, give us directions
on bow to live for real happiness.
sukháya karmáni karoti loko
na taih sukham vdnyad-upáramam     vd
vindeta bhüyas tata eva duhkhath
yad atra yuktath bhagavdn vadén nah
3. Great philanthropic souls travel on tbe eartb on bebalf of tbe Lord Janárdana to
show compassion to tbe fallen souls, wbo are averse to tbe sense of subordination to
tbe Lord and are tbus suffering.
janasya krsndd vimukhasya daivdd
adharma-silasya suduhkhitasya
anugrahdyeha caranti nünath
bhütdni bhavydni jandrdanasya
4. Give me instruction on tbe transcendental devotional service of tbe Lord, so
tbat Paramátmá is pleased to impart knowledge of tbe Absolute Trutb (as
Brahman, Paramátmá and Bhagaván).
5. Purusa-avatáras - H o w does tbe independent and desireless Lord Krsna, tbe
lord of tbree purusas [tryadhisah) accept incarnations to create and maintain tbis
world?
6. Virát-rüpa - H o w does tbe Lord, fixed in tbe space of His beart, sleep in tbe
Viraja River and bow does He enter into tbe universe and expand into many forms?
Canto 3 Overview
7. Lilavataras - Describe Lord's various pastimes tbat produce auspiciousness for
brábmanas, cows and devatás. Our minds are never satiated bearing tbem.
kridan vidhatte   dvija-go-suránárh
ksemdya karmdny avatdra-bhedaih
mano na trpyaty api srnvatdm nah
susloka-maules   caritdmrtdni
8. H o w does tbe Lord (adhiloka-ndtha) create different planets along witb tbeir rulers
wbere living entities are situated in different modes?
9. H o w does tbe Lord (as Brabmá) create tbe natures, activities, forms, features and
names of tbe different living creatures?
10-16:   VIDURA'S EXCLUSIVE INTEREST IN KRSNA-KATHÁ
10. Being devoid of tbe nectar of Krsna's pastimes, tbe lesser topics like tbe bigber
and lower status of buman society (Mabábbárata) wbicb I beard from Vyásadeva
bave not satisfied me.
L i n k : But you have heard plentiful discussions about Krsna also.
11. N o satiation - Wbo in buman society can be fully satisfied witb bearing tbe talks
of tbe Lord (tirtha-pdda) wbo is worsbiped by great devotees? Sucb topics can cut off
one's bondage simply by entering tbe boles of one's ears.
kas trpnuydt tirtha-pado 'bhidhdndt
satresu vah süribhir idyamdndt
yah karna-nddim purusasya ydto
bhava-praddm geha-ratim chinatti
12. Your friend, Vyasadeva bas described Mababbarata, to attract tbe mass of people
to Krsna-Kathd [Bbagavad-gitá] tbrougb matériái topics.
13. Result of bearing - Krsna-Kathd increases indifference to all otber tbings and
sucb remembrance of tbe lotus feet vanquisbes all miseries witbout delay.
sa sraddadhanasya vivardhamana    viraktim anyatra karoti pumsah
hareh paddnusmrti-nirvrtasya   samasta-duhkhdpyayam dsu dhatte
14. Sinful and ignorant persons (materialists) wbo are averse to Krsna-Kathd, are
pitied by tbe pitiable (impersonalists). I (pure devotee) pity botb of tbem because tbeir
lives are spoiled (dyur vrthd) in rituals (smrtindm) and speculation (vdda-gati).
wá.Mmfá.MmM.MM:m.Mjm
*^^(fj^^t^'^'0'tfjl2^^                             3.5 Vidura's Talks With Maitreya
15. O friend of the distressed (drta-bandho), hari-kathd alone can do good for all
[sarma-ddtur).  Kindly describe [kirtaya tirtha-kirteh)   tbat essence of all topics
[kathdsu sdram) for our welfare [sivdya nah) like bees coUect boney from flowers.
tad asya kausdrava sarma-ddtur
hareh kathdm eva kathdsu sdram
uddhrtya puspebhya ivdrta-bandho
sivdya nah kirtaya tirtha-kirteh
L i n k : Maitreya could not decidé what to describe first, so Vidura hinted.
16. Please describe tbe activities of tbe Purusa-avatdras   first.
17-21:   MAITREYA RSI HONOURED VIDURA AND EXPRESSED GRATITUDE
17. Maitreya Rsi greatly bonoured Vidura and tben spoke for tbe welfare of all.
18. By your glorious inquiries [sddhu prstarh), you sbowed mercy botb to me and tbis
world, as your mind is absorbed in Transcendence         [adhoksajdtmanah).
19. Tbis is not astonishing because, being born from Vyásadeva, you bave accepted
tbe Lord witbout deviation [grhito    ananya-bhdvena).
20.1 know tbat you were Yamarája wbo are now Vidura due to tbe cursing of
Mándavya Muni.
21. Y o u are Lord's eternal associate and for your sake, tbe Lord left instructions witb
me before departing (Also ref. 3.4.35).
22-38:   MAITREYA RSI EXPLAINED THE PROCESS OF CREATION'''PPP^
22. I sball describe to you tbe pastimes of tbe purusa           incarnations - creation,
maintenance and destruction of tbe universe.
L i n k : To describe the creation process, Maitreya described the prior            state   first.
(Maitreya began to explain the purpose of catuh-sloki Bhdgavatam.)
23. Bhagaván alone existed prior to tbe creation of tbe universe, as one witbout a
second (Neitber tbe purusdvatdras nor tbe demigods existed).
24. Before tbe creation, tbe external energy [mdyd-sakti) was dormant, wbile tbe
internál energy was manifest. Tbe Lord [eka-rdt, drastd) felt imperfect witbout tbe
external energy, like a lonely busband in tbe absence of bis wife.
( .1111..   3      Overv\e^^^^JM'^if^Mlfk
- í f l H H H B *2£l?-iC^tz!rí2l?2s5?-Ti^iZ
Note: The Lord wanted to create the matériái cosmic manifestation to awaken the
forgetful sleeping conditioned souls to spiritual consciousness and thus give them
another chance to go back to Godhead.
25. Lord, tbe perfect seer (samdrastuh), tbrougb tbe agency of maya, wbicb works as
botb cause and effect (sad-asad-atmikd), creates tbe entire matériái manifestation.
26. Tbe Lord of Mabá-Vaikuntba (adhoksajah) in His plenary expansion as
Karanodakasayi Visnu (purusendtma-bhütena)            impregnates tbe matériái nature of
tbree modes [máydydm guna-mayydm - prakrti or pradhdna) witb tbe living entities
(jwa-sakti). Tbis bappens by tbe influence of Lord's time potency (kdla-vrttyd). [Lord
is viryavdn and tbe living entities (jiva-sakti,) are tbe vtryam.]
Note: Every stage of creation is influenced by the Lord's glancé and the time factor
and is associated with the matériái energy and the jiva-sakti.
27. Influenced by tbe eternal time (kdla-coditdt), tbe pradhdna (avyakta) is tben
transformed into mahat-tattva, wbicb is predominated by sattva and is composed of
tbe potency of knowledge [jhdna-sakti).
Note: Accompanying the mahat-tattva is the sütra-tattva, that manifests the potency
of activity {kriyd-sakti), and is predominated by rajas (passión). (Ref. 11.24.6)
28-29. Mahat-tattva        is glanced upon by tbe Lord, and transforms into ahankdra or
aham-tattva (falsé ego) wbicb is predominated by tamás (ignorance). Tbe falsé ego is
manifested i n tbree phases:
i.    Adhidaiva:    kartr (doer) - mana (mind) - vaikdrika (goodness)
ii.   Adhydtma:     kdrana (cause) - indriya (senses) - taijasa (passión)
iii. Adhibhuta:      kdrya (effect) - bhüta (elements) - tdmasa (ignorance)
30. Falsé ego in Goodness —> Mind and demigods.
31. Falsé ego in Passión         Senses (speculative knowledge and fruitive activities).
32. Falsé ego in Ignorance          Sense objects (tan-mdtras) and gross elements.
Note: Let J = Lord's glancé + Time + external energy
32. Sound           Sky (Quality: Sound)
33. Sky + £ ^ Toucb            A i r (Qualities: Toucb + Sound)
35. Fire + Air + f        Taste —> Water (Qualities: Taste + Form + Toucb + Sound)
36. Water + Fire + £ ^ Smell —> Eartb (Qualities: Smell+Taste+Form+Toucb+Sound)
37. Tbe qualities of all tbe pbysical elements are due only to tbe final toucb of tbe
Lord's glancé. Tbe qualities of eacb element starting witb sky increase successively.
•'^^f2^2í5?"!L^tíjf^^LslxL^
3.5 Vidura's Talks With Maitreya
KARANODAKASÁYÍ-VISNU
Svámsa -                             jivas into Matériái
23-37:  PROCESS OF
CREATION
(Lord's               His glancé impregnates                         Nature)
Kála                                   Jívas
The Supreme Lord's glancé on
MATERIAL NATURE (PRADHANA)                                          the sum totál of matériái energy
(mdyd) infuses it with time
3 modes inactive - in undifferentiated/ unmixed state
(kdla), destiny (karma) and
nature (svabháva) of all jivas,
Í Z                                               therehy agitating it.
MAHAT-TATTVA                                            The agitated equilihrium state
Mahat-tattva (in sattva) \              Sutra-tattva (in rajas)                 (pradhdna) then produces mahat-
tattva, a state which although
Í Z                                               has all three modes, is
predominantly of goodness and
AHANKARA (predominantly in tamás)
passión due to jnána and kriyd
Goodness                    Passión                  Ignorance               saktis.
This state further transforms into
Kartá (Doer)              Kárana (Cause)              Kárya (Effect)          ahankdra,          which         is
Jnána-s'akti                Kriyá-áakti               Dravya-sakti            predominantly         in    tamás,
I                           I                 ignorance. This state produces 3
energies,    called: jhdna-sakti
Adhidaiva                 Adhyátmá                    Adhibhúta             (derived from sattva-guna or
vaikdrikah), kriyd-sakti (derived
Mind &                Prána, 10              5 tanmatras &          from rajoguna or taijasah) and
10 Sense                Senses,                5 elements
devatás               Intelligence                                   dravya-sakti (derived         from
tamoguna or tdmasah).
:nses              Devatás                                                   The dravya-sakti has the capacity
Ear                                            Sound M           Ether
Dig-devatás                                               to produce five gross elements.
Eyes                 Sürya                                                     Kriyd-sakti produces the senses.
Skin                 Váyu                      Touch M            Air          Jhdna-sakti produces the sense
Nose                 As'vinT-kumáras                                           devatas.
Tongue               Varuna                    Form í->          Eire          At each levél of transformation,
Hands                Indra                                                     the Lord's energy in the form of
Eeet                 Upendra                                                   time produces the suhsequent
Voice                Agni                      Taste h> Water |
state of transformation.
Anus                 Mitra                                                     Note: A similar section is also
Genitals             Prajápati                 Smell r >         Earth         found in Canto 2, Chapter 5.
38. The controlling deities of all elements, portions of Visnu, were unable to perform
tbeir universal duties as tbey were not related witb eacb otber. Witb földed bands
tbey began praising tbe Lord.
Canto 3 Overview
Ujjjp    39-51:   PRAYERS BY THE DEMIGODS TO KARANODAKASAYI VISNU
39-43: The Glorious Shelter of the Lord's Lotus Feet
39. Umbrella for miseries - Your lotus feet are like an umbrella for the surrendered
souls (prapanna-tdpopasamdtapatram) by which they throw off all miseries.
L i n k : Suffering is due to ignorance and knowledge alleviates ignorance.
40. F u i l of knowledge - Overwhelmed by tdpa-traya, tbe jívas can never bave any
happiness. Therefore, we all take shelter (dsrayema) of tbe sbade of Your lotus feet
(dnghri-cchdydrh), wbicb are full of knowledge (sa-vidydm).
41. Vanquishes sinful reactions - Tbe great sages, carried by tbe wings of tbe Vedas
(chandah-suparnair),   always search after tbe nest of Your lotuslike face (mukha-
padma-nidaih).   By taking shelter of tbe Ganges (sarid-vardydh),     tbey surrender to
Your lotus feet (tirtha-padah) tbat vanquisb sinful reactions   (agha-marsoda).
mdrganti yat te mukha-padma-nidais
chandah-suparnair rsayo vivikte
yasydgha-marsoda-sarid-vardydh
padam padam tirtha-padah prapanndh
42. Reveals knowledge and detachment - Hearing about and by medirating upon
Your lotus feet (anghri-saroja-pitham) in devotion gives knowledge and detachment.
43. Awards Remembrance and Courage - Y o u assume incarnations for tbe
creation, maintenance and dissolution and Your lotus feet awards remembrance
(smrtarh) and courage (abhayath) to tbe devotees.
44-47: Qualified & Unqualified Candidates for the Shelter of Lord's Lotus Feet
44. Your lotus feet are unapproacbable by tbose bound by thoughts of T and mine',
altbougb Y o u dwell in tbeir bodies.
L i n k : Why do they not take to pure bhakti which is attained by devotee's association?
45. Offensive persons engrossed in materialistic activities (asad-vrttibhir) cannot
see Your lotus feet, but pure devotees can see as tbeir only aim is to relish Your
activities (padanydsa-vildsa-laksydh).
46. Simply by drinking tbe nectar of K r s n a - K a t b a and witb earnest devotional
service one easily acbieves complete knowledge, renunciation and attains tbe
Vaikuntbaloka.
pdnena te deva kathd-sudhdydh  pravrddha-bhaktyd        visaddsayd ye
vairdgya-sdram pratilabhya bodhath yathdhjasdnviyur         akuntha-dhisnyam
'mMMMíM
'&M.MMmiMjm'M.MMMM.m:
3.5 Vidura's Talks With Maitreya
47. Jnánis Vs Bhaktas - Jnanis by dint of mentái concentration and knowledge, also
enter into Y o u (sdyujya-mukti), but for tbem tbere is mucb pain, wbereas tbe devotee
wbo simply serves Y o u feels no sucb pain.
48-51: Prayers for enlightenment and directions
48. Y o u created us for tbe sake of creation. But because we are disunited, we cannot
act concertedly for Your pleasure.
49. Enlighten us regarding tbe ways by wbicb we can offer Y o u all enjoyable tbings
so tbat botb we and all living entities can maintain ourselves witbout disturbance.
50. You are tbe origin of all demigods, oldest, and uncbanged. Y o u are unborn, yet
impregnated tbe external energy witb tbe semen of tbe totál living entities.
51. Kindly award us Your kind directions, Your perfect knowledge and potency so
tbat we can rendet Y o u service for wbicb we are created.
Prayers of Demigods
(3.5.39-51)
39-43: Glorious |               44-47: Qualified and                  48-51: Prayers for
shelter of Lord's lotus!        unqualified candidates for the           enlightenment and
feet          I            shelter of lotus feet                     directions
—              I Zdd.
39: Umbrella for
miseries       Unqualified people :     Qualified persons
40: Full of          44: Mamáham               45: Aim to
knowledge             conception              relish Lord's
activities
41: Source of         45: Offensive andj         46: Drink         50:You impregnated
Ganges, vanquish           materialistic I
nectar of         external energy with:
sinful reactions                                 Krsna-Kathá               Jívas.
42: Reveals                                    47: Bhaktas              51: Give us
knowledge and                                    are superior         directions to sérve
detachment                                        to Jnánis                  You
43: Awards
remembrance and
courage
Seeing the creation process
1-10: Development        suspended, Ford sent His
of the Gigantic        cohesive energy into the
Universal Form        elements and gradually the
Virát-rüpa manifested
11-26:
Different demigods appeared
Manifestation of
when their respective locations
different demigods
are differentiated from the
from the Universal
Form                       Virát-rüpa
J
3.6 Creation          27-34:          27-29: Three planetary systems
of the       Development of              and their residents
Universal      planets, living
Form       entities and varnas          30-33: Four Varnas
35: No one can estimate the
Virát-rüpa's potency
36: In spite of my inability, I
glorify Lord Hari
35-40: Maitreya
muni felt unworthy     37: Highest perfection - simply
to describe Ford's       glorifying and hearing the
unlimited glories              Lord's glories
38-40: Demigods, Brahmá and
even Lord Himself cannot
understand Lord's glories. He
is beyond words, mind and
ego
3.6 Creation Of The Universal Form
L i n k : At this stage of the universal   creation (at the end of 3.5), the 23 elements
namely, mahat-tattva, ahankdra, five tan-mdtras, five gross elements, ten senses and
the mind are existing       in an unmixed state. Therefore     the creative activities   are
suspended. The predominant deities of all these elements offered prayers to the Lord
(3.5.39-51). In 3.6 Maitreya    describes how Lord Kdranodakasdyi       Visnu responds to
those prayers by entering into the universe as Garbhodakasdyi        Visnu, and manifests
the Virdt-rüpa (universal     form).
1. Lord Karanodakasayi Visnu saw the creative functions suspended due to the non-
combination of His potencies (twenty-tbree elements).
2-3. Tbereafter, tbe Lord sent His Káli energy, tbe time potency or tbe bibhrat-sakti,
or tbe cohesive energy, wbicb amalgamates all tbe different elements. Tben, all tbe
living entities including tbe demigods are enlivened as if awakening from sleep.
4-5. Tbus set into action by tbe will of tbe Lord, tbe twenty-tbree elements produced
tbe gigantic universal form (Adhipürusa or Visva-rüpa or Virdt-purusa) wbicb is tbe
resting place for all tbe planetary systems and all movable and immovable creations.
6. Tbe Virdt-purusa or Hiranmaya (like foetus) witb all tbe living entities tesided for
tbousand celestial years on tbe water within tbe universe.
7. Tbe Virdt-purusa, or tbe universal foetus consists of tbe totál energy of tbe mahat-
tattva, divided Himself by Himself into (i) jiva-sakti - consciousness of living
entities, (ii) prdna-sakti - life airs and (iii) dtmd-sakti - self-identification wbicb are
subdivided into one, ten and tbree respectively.
8. Tbis Virdt-purusa is tbe first avatdra of Garbbodakasáyi Visnu and is tbe Self of
unlimited living entities and tbey rest on H i m .
L i n k 7 -> 9: The one, ten and three are described.
9. Tbe gigantic universal form is represented by tbree (adhydtma - body, mind and
senses; adhidaiva - controlling demigods of tbe senses; adhibhüta - gross organs
along witb sense objects), ten (ten kinds of life energy) and one (tbe beart wbere life
energy is generated).
10.  Tbe Lord as tbe Supersoul, remembering tbe prayers of tbe demigods,
manifested tbe virdt-rüpa by His own energy.
Lord saw the creative functions suspended - elements in unmixed state
I
Lord's Kall energy (energy of cohesion) entered the 23 elements
I
[All jlvas (& their dormant karmas) got awakened] & Elements are comhined
Virát-rüpa (Adhipürusam) came into existence
Elements comhined together to form a fetus in which all Iokas & carácaras
existed
Virát-rüpa lived on waters with jlvas for 1000 celestial years (till Brahmá's
birth); then Lord entered as Garbhodakasáyi Visnu, divided Himself by
Himself into
Consciousness of      10 Life airs -* prána-    Self-identification
jívas jíva-s'akti (1)         sakti (10) • i          átmá-s'akti (3)
Adhyatma            Adhibhüta (gross sense     Adhidaiva (sense
(senses)           organs & sense objects)       devatás)
10 Life Airs         Function
prána                through the nose in breatbing
apdna                through the rectum as evacuated bodily air
samána               adjusts food in stomach, sounds as belching
uddna                through throat, stoppage constitutes suffocation
vydna                totál air circulates throughout body
ndga                 facilitates opening of eyes, moutb, etc.
krkara               increases appetite
kürma                helps contraction
devadatta            helps relaxation by opening the moutb wide (in yawning)
dhanahjaya           helps sustenance
MMMMMMMMMMMmmMM
3.6 Creation Of The Universal Form
MMMMMmMli:
11. Hear from me how the Lord separated Himself into the forms of the demigods.
12-26: These verses describe wben tbe different locations (adhisthana, tbe adhibhüta
aspect. E x : moutb) are generated in tbe universal form, wbicb presiding deity
(adhidaiva, E x : Agni) will reside tbere along witb its sense organ (adhydtma. E x :
voice) and wbat is tbe sense object or action of tbat organ (adhibhüta. E x : express
himself in words).
Note: Sense objects or tan-mdtras exist only for the five knowledge senses, and not
for the action senses.
Mouth (asyarh)        Voice (vaca)               Fire (Agni)       Express oneself in
words
Palate (tdlu)         Tongue (jihvd)             Varuna            To taste everything
Nostrils (ndse)       Nose (ghrdna)             Asvini-kumdras     To smell the aroma of
everything
Eyes (aksini)         Eye sight (caksuh)        Sürya              To see various forms
Gross Skin (carma)    Skin                      Anila (wind        To realize tactile
god)               knowledge (touch)
Ears (karna)          Hearing principle         Dikdevatd          To hear different
(srotra)                                     sounds
Skin (tvaca)          Hairs on tbe Skin         Trees              Itching and happiness
(roma)                    personified        due to touch
Genitals (medhra)     Subtle sense organ         Prajápati         Sex pleasure can be
which emits semen                            enjoyed
(sisna)
Evacuating channel.   Organ of evacuation       Mitra              Can pass stool
anus (guda)           (pdyuna)
Hands (hastau)        The hands, which           Indra             Transact business for
perform buying and                           one's lively hood
selling (vdrtaya)
Canto 3 O v e r v i e w ^ H l t t T i J x2*lj';gj^^^^
WtKKKm í 2 2 £ ? - L ^ x 5 f l I ? 2 í X r ! l ^ X c X ^ ^
Legs [pádau)              Feet (gatya)                     Visnu                   Move to the
(Upendra)               destination
Intelligence              Understanding                    Brahmd (Lord            Power of
(buddhi)                  (bodhena)                        of the Vedas)           understanding an
object is experienced
Heart (seat of            Mentái activity                  Moon (candra)           Can conduct mentái
Mind, hrdayatn)           (manasa)                                                 speculation
Matériái Ego              Partial activity                 Rúdra                   Self-identification,
[dtmanam)                 (karmana)                                                transaction of
objective action
Consciousness              Conscious part (citta)          Totál energy            Able to conceive the
(sattvatn)                                                  (mahat-tattva)         specific knowledge
27-33:    DEVELOPMENT OF PLANETS, LIVING ENTITIES AND VARNAS
27-29: Development of planets and living entities
Head                       Heavenly planets                 Demigods who are in sattva-guna
Legs                       Earthly planets                  Humán beings who are in rajo-guna
Abdomen                    Sky (Bhuvar region)              Associates of Rúdra who are in tamo-guna
30-33: Manifestation of the Varnas
From Virát-            Manifested                                 Role
rüpa's
Mouth                  The Vedic wisdom, brdhmanas                Natural teachers and spiritual masters
Arms                   The power of protection,                   To protect society from the
ksatriyas                                  disturbance of thieves and miscreants.
Thighs                 The means of livelihood of all             To produce of grains and their
persons, vaisyas                           distribution to the prajds
Legs                   Service for the sake of                    To satisfy the Lord by service.
perfecting dharma, südras
&"ö't2lHÍ)í''t^^^                                    3.6 Creation Of The Universal Form       I
34. As all the varnas along with their occupational duties are born from tbe Lord,
everyone bas to worship tbe Lord under tbe direction of guru (yajanti              sva-gurum
harim).
35-40:   MAITREYA MUNI FELT UNWORTHY TO DESCRIBE
THE LORD'S UNLIMITED GLORIES .^^^^
35. Wbo can estimate tbe transcendental time, work and potency of tbe gigantic fotm
manifested by tbe Lord's internál potency (yogamaya-balodayam)}
L i n k : Humble Maitreya   Muni feels unworthy to describe Lord's      glories.
36. I n spite of my inability, I glorify Lord Hari witb wbatever I bave been able to
bear from my guru and assimilate witb my intelligence. Otberwise my power of
speaking would remain uncbaste.
tathdpi kirtaydmy anga yathd-mati yathd-srutam
kirtim hareh svdm sat-kartum   giram anydbhidhdsatim
37. Glorifying tbe Pious Actor is tbe bigbest perfectional gain of buman speecb.
Lord's activities are nicely put in writing by tbe learned and tbe purpose of ear is
served by being near tbem.
ekdnta-ldbham vacaso nu pumsdrh         susloka-mauler guna-vddam dhuh
srutes ca vidvadbhir updkrtdydrh       kathd-sudhdydm     upasamprayogam
38. Even Brabmá, after a tbousand years of matured meditation, could only know
tbat tbe glories of tbe Supreme Soul are inconceivable.
L i n k : Further example of Lord's   inconceivability.
39. Lord's wonderful potency bewilders even tbe great jugglers (mdyindm api
mohini). Even tbe self-sufficient Lord Himself cannot know it, tben wbat to speak of
others?
40. Words, mind, ego and tbeir respective demigods could not know tbe Lord.
Therefore, we simply bave to offer respectful obeisances unto H i m .
Canto 3 Overview               ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ M M ^ ^ ^
3 . 7 FURTHER INQUIRIES BY VIDURA
2-4: How is the Lord who is spiritual and
transcendental be connected with matériái
1-7: Vidura inquired                       gunas?
about Isvara and
the jlvas
5-6: How does the pure soul become
engaged in nescience and thus suffer?
8-14: Maitreya           9: "Lord is overcome by illusion and still
dispelled all               unconditioned" - this is illogical
misconceptions
about the ísVara          10-11: Distress of living entity is due to
and jívas and                      misidentification.
recommended
bhakti                12-14: Solution - devotional service
15: My doubts are dispelled by your
convincing answers.
3.7 Further
15-20: Vidura
Inquiries by        shared his heart felt    16-17: I am convinced that the hasis of jivas'
Vidura             realizations with            disturbances is the Lord's maya.
Maitreya
18-20: This conviction will convert into
realization by the rare service of devotees
that gives rati and vanquishes miseries.
21-38: Vidura's       Varieties of questions, answers to which span
further inquiries                 the entire Bhágavatam
I 39: Without guru one can't have knowledge
of devotional service.
39-42: Vidura
declared his            40: Purpose of my inquiries is to hear
confidence in                     pastimes of Hari.
Maitreya
41: Your answers will provide immunity from
all miseries and is the greatest charity
^Í^éf^Í^éí''^^ÍV^éí''&'tf^                             3.7 Further Inquiries By Vidura          M
L i n k : In 3.7 Vidura asks questions to resolve his doubts about the Isvara, the Jiva and
other topics in bhakti.
1 -7:   VIDURA'S INQUIRIES ABOUT ÍSVARA AND JIVAS
1. Vidura asked the following questions to Maitreya in a pleasing manner.
L i n k [3.5.25-26] —• 3.7.2: Having    heard how the Lord created the universes by
glancing on matériái nature, which consists of the three modes, Vidura inquired from
Maitreya about how the Supreme Lord could be connected with these modes.
2- 4 : inquiries about 'Tbe Isvara'
2. H o w is the Lord who is spiritual (cin-mdtrasya) and transcendental [nirgunasya)
be    connected    witb   matériái gunas}       H o w can tbe Lord         wbo is
uncbangeable (ávikdrinah) perform actions tbat indicate cbange?
3- 4. Children play being impelled by desire. But tbe Lord is self-satisfied [svatah-trpta
- witbout desires) and detached (nivrtta). Tben wby does He create, maintain and
dissolve tbe universe by His mdyd-sakti}
5-6: Inquiries about 'tbe jiva'
5. H o w does tbe pure soul become engaged in nescience?
6. Wby does tbe living entity suffer in spite of tbe Lord's presence in bis beart?
7. M y mind is illusioned, and I request you to cleat it up.
8-14: MAITREYA DISPELLED ALL MISCONCEPTIONS ABOUT ÍSVARA AND JÍVAS
AND RECOMMENDED BHAKTI
8. Maitreya, being God conscious (bhagavat-cittah)             replied Vidura wbo was
inquisitive about tbe Absolute Trutb (tattva-jijhdsund).
L i n k : Maitreya first refutes illogical statements about the Lord (Answer to 3.7.2-4).
9. Somé say tbat tbe Supreme Lord is overcome by illusion and yet He is
unconditioned. Tbis is against all logic.
L i n k : Maitreya answers Vidura's inquiries about the jiva (Answer to 3.7.5-6)
10-11:   Problem is átma-viparyayah -
10. Distress of living entity is due to misidentification alone. Tbere is no factual
background to it just as one sees bis bead cut off in a dream.
Canto 3 Overview   ^^fÉí^^lÉf^ifiQÍ^^
sKKKKS      1^~í3c1Z!xy^
11. Example: Just as the moon teflected on watet appears to ttemble, tbe self
associated witb mattét appears to be qualified as mattét.
12-14:   Solution is bhakti - devotional service
12. Tbat misconception of self-identity can be diminisbed by Lotd Vásudeva's metcy
{vasudevanukampaya),    by tbe ptocess of devotional service (Bhagavad-bhakti-
yogena) in tbe mode of detachment     {nivrtti-dharmena).
13. Wben tbe senses ate engaged in serving Lord H a r i , all miseries ate vanquished.
14. Hearing and chanting tbe Lord's qualities vanquisbes all matériái miseries
(sddhana-bhakti). Wbat to speak of tbose wbo attained attraction for serving Lord's
lotus feet  (bháva-bhakti).
asesa-sanklesa-samam vidhatte
gunánuvdda-sravanam     murdreh
kim vd punas tac-carandravinda-
pardga-sevd-ratir dtma-labdhd
15. A l l my doubts about tbe Lord and tbe jiva bave been cut off by tbe weapon of
your convincing words {suktdsind) and my mind is entering tbem.
16. You bave accutately explained tbat tbe disturbances of jiva have no otber basis
tban tbe Lord's external energy.
17. Botb tbe lowest of fools and tbe liherated enjoy happiness, wbereas tbe otber
persons in between suffer.
18. Service converts conviction into realization - I am convinced tbat tbis matériái
manifestation is witbout substance. But I will realize tbis only by serving your feet.
arthdbhdvarh viniscitya pratitasydpi ndtmanah
tdm cdpi yusmac-carana-   sevaydham pardnude
19. T w o results of service - Serving tbe spiritual master (yat sevayd), (i) one
develops transcendental ecstasy in Lord's service in various relationships (rati-rdsah)
and (ii) dispels all matériái distress (vyasandrdanah).
yat-sevayd bhagavatah küta-sthasya  madhu-dvisah
rati-rdso bhavet tivrah pddayor vyasandrdanah
>:MM.m:mm:mm                                     3.7 Further Inquiries By Vidura         6.5
20. Rarity of service - Persons whose austerity is meagte (alpa-tapasah) can hatdly
obtain idurápá) tbe service of tbe pure devotees wbo constantly glorify tbe Lotd
(yatropagiyate nityath) and ate on tbe patb to Vaikuntba  (vaikuntha-vartmasu).
durápá hy alpa-tapasah      sevá vaikuntha-vartmasu
yatropagiyate nityarh     deva-devo janárdanah
After creating tbe mahat-tattva, Lotd Káranodakasáyi Visnu entered tbe
universe as Garbbodakasáyi Visnu and manifested tbe virdt-rüpa fotm in wbicb
all planets exist.
L i n k : Vidura asks more questions by taking clue from previous topics, 3.5 and 3.6.
Note: The following questions of Vidura are similar to Pariksit's questions in
2.8, which Sukadeva Gosvámi answered throughout the Bhdgavatam. Against the
questions, we have given somé references of Bhágavatam sections (based on our
understanding) in which these topics ate majorly discussed.
Kindly explain to me about
23-24. The vibhütis of the Supreme Lotd (different powers of tbe specific divisions)
tbat populate tbe universe [sárga -3.5-11, 26, 29).
25. A l l tbat Brabmá bas created (visarga - 3.12, 20), Manus and tbe descendants of
tbose Manus (visarga and manvantara - 3.21-24; 4.1-5.15; 8.1-14).
26. Different planets, tbeir situation and measurements (sthdnam -5.1,16-26).
27. Categories of living beings and tbeir generations and suhdivisions (visarga -3.10,
12, 20, 29; 6.4, 6, 18; 8.14).
28. Guna-avatdras and pastimes of tbe Lotd.
29. Varndsrama, great sages and Vedic divisions (7.11-15; 11.17-18; 12.6-7).
30. Yoga, yajna, jndna and sánkhya as well as Nárada Pancardtra (3.25-33; 11.10-29).
31. Impetfections of faitbless atheists, cross bteeding, and movements of tbe living
entities in various species of life as per tbeir work and tbe modes (3.30-32).
32. Lout purusárthas and tules for ptofession and for punishment (3.25-33; 5.17, 19,
26; Cantos 7 and 11).
33. Deatb tites (7.14), pitrs and constellation attangement and divisions of time.
(3.11, 31; 5.21-22; 7.11-15; 11.22)
34. Charity, austerity and sacrifice and duties in different situations. (Canto 3;
11.17-18; 7.11-15)
Canto 3 Overview   J B jlljpt§Tfi"^^^^
ÉBBBBÍ   / í l ? - ! ! ^ ^ j?2?X£^
35. H o w to completely satisfy the Supteme Lotd. (Cantos 3-11)
36. Spiritual Masters ate kind to needy and they describe all knowledge witbout
being asked. (Speak on subjects wbicb bave not been asked.)
37. H o w many matériái dissolutions exits and wbo sutvives after it to setve tbe
Lotd wbile He is asleep. (3.10; 12.4)
38. Ttutbs of jiva and Isvara, essential knowledge of Vedas, and necessities for tbe
guru and sisya. (3.25-33; 7.13; 11.7-10, 14; 12.4, 6-7)
39-42:   VIDURA DECLARED HIS CONFIDENCE IN MAITREYA
39. Knowledge is impossible witbout a guru - H o w could one bave knowledge of
devotional service and detachment witbout tbe belp of spotless devotees
(anagha-süribhih) wbo ate tbe source of knowledge?
40. I asked all tbese questions witb a view to know tbe pastimes of Hari, so kindly
describe tbem for all of tbose wbo bave lost tbeir vision [nasta-caksusah).
41. T b e greatest welfare activity - Your answers will gtant immunity from all
matériái miseries (jivdbhaya-praddnasya) and tbis charity is greater tban all
charities, sacrifices, penances etc.
sarve vedas ca yajnds ca tapo ddndni cdnagha
jivdbhaya-praddnasya    na kurviran kaldm api
42. Maitreya, capable of explaining tbe Purdnas,        being enlivened by Vidura's
questions, began to narrate tbe bhagavat-kathd.
GARBHODAKASAYÍ VISNU
1: Maitreya acknowledged Vidura - "You
come in the devoted dynasty of Puru"
1-9: Disciplic
succession of       2: Answer to 3.5.2 - Bhágavatam benefits
Srímad-                      suffering people
Bhágavatam
3-9: Parampará of Bhágavatam
10-12: Garbodakas'áyi Visnu lay down for
1000 yuga cycies in the water of dissolution
10-14: The               containing the jívas within Him
reawakening of
creation           13-14: With the Lord's glancé, the subtle
subject matter of creation sprouted from the
3.8                                  Lord's navel in the form of a lotus bud
Manifestation                          15-16: Brahma took birth on the lotus and
Of Brahmá                            examined four directions and got four heads
from          15-23: Brahmá's
Garbbodakasáyi       birth and his     17-21: Being unsuccessful in searching for the
search for the        source of the lotus, he returned to top
Visnu           absolute truth
V     Z       y                         22-23: Brahmá meditated on the Lord and
finally saw Garbhodakas'áyí Visnu
24: Coral mountain
25: Grandeur of Lord's body
26: Merciful display of lotus feet
24-33: Beautiful      27: Acknowiedges devotee's service with
darsana of Lord                       smile
Garbhodakasáyl
Visnu                 28: Transcendental adornment
29: Sandalwood tree
30: Great mountain
31-33: Brahmá identified the Lord, saw the
I ingredients for creation and began prayers
1 - 9 : MAITREYA ACKNOWLEDGED VIDURA'S DEVOTION AND
DESCRIBED THE DISCIPLIC SUCCESSION OF SRÍMAD-BHÁGAVATAM
L i n k : Vidura said he will gain knowledge by serving Maitreya      (3.7.18 and   3.7.39).
Maitreya responds that he himself is indeed fortunate to get the association of Vidura.
1. You are born in tbe dynasty of King Püru wbose descendants are devoted to
Bbagaván (bhagavat-pradhanah).        Because of your attempt, tbe garland of tbe Lord's
glories (ajita-kírti-máldm)    are becoming newer and newer at every moment.
L i n k : Answer to Vidura's question in 3.5.2 (how to attain real happiness?)
2.1 will now speak Bhdgavatam, wbicb was directly spoken by Bbagaván to tbe great
sages for tbe benefit of people wbo bave entered great suffering to get little bappiness.
so 'ham nrndm ksulla-sukhdya duhkhath
mahad gatdndth viramdya tasya
pravartaye bhdgavatath purdnarh
'    yad dha sdksdd bhagavdn rsibhyah
3-9: Disciplic succession of Srímad-Bhágavatam
3. Somé time ago, tbe sages beaded by Sanat-kumára inquired from Lord Sankarsana,
wbo was situated below Pátálaloka, about tbe ttutbs regarding Vásudeva.
4. Lord Sankarsana was medirating on Lord Vásudeva, but for tbe sake of tbe sages
He sligbtly opened His lotuslike eyes and began to speak.
5. Sages had come through the Ganges from tbe bigbest planets down to tbe lower
region and toucbed tbe lotus feet of tbe Lord.
6. Tbe sages glorified tbe Lord in rbytbmic accents witb select words (skhalat-
padena) full of affection and love.
7- 9. Descent of Srimad-Bhágavatam i n the parampará - Lord Sankarsana   Sanat-
kumára —> Sánkbyáyana Muni             Párására (and Brbaspati)    Maitreya Rsi.
L i n k : After   explaining   the descent of Srimad-Bhdgavatam,     Maitreya    starts   the
description ofthe reawakening of creation after the end of the night of Brahmd.
10-14:    MAITREYA DESCRIBED THE REAWAKENING OF CREATION
8-w b e n tbe universe were submerged in tbe dissolution waters (at tbe end of
Brahmá's previous day), Garbbodakasáyi Visnu was lying on tbe bed of Ananta,
enjoying His internál potency (svdtma-ratau) witb H i s eyes balf closed.
[mmmmmmmmMMmmmM
k
3.8 Manifestation Of Brahma
11. Lord contained within Himself all the living entities who remained with their
subtle bodies by dint of tbe energy called kdla.
12. Tbe Lord lay down for 1000 yuga cycies (one nigbt of Brabmá) and glanced on
tbe subtle bodies of tbe living entities within H i m . By His kdla-sakti tbey started to
develop tbeir fruitive activities.
13-14. Tbe Lord's glancé agitated tbe subtle subject matter of creation (tbat contain
tbe elements in subtle state, tbe subtle bodies and tbe aggregáté of tbe fruitive
activities of living entities) witb tbe mode of passión, and it sprouted tbrougb His
abdomen and took tbe sbape of a lotus bud (padma-kosah) and illuminated
everything like tbe sun.
Summary of 3.8.10-14: In tbe case of a full dissolution of tbe universe wbicb bappens at
tbe end of tbe life of Brabmá, tbe matériái energy is completely wound up. In tbe case of
a partial dissolution tbat bappens at tbe end of a day of Brabmá, only tbe gross bodies of
tbe jivas become unmanifest wbile tbeir subtle bodies and tbeir karmas mérge within tbe
body of Garbbodakasáyi Visnu along witb tbe elements in tbeir subtle form. Tbey
become reawakened witb tbe glancé of tbe Lord and sprout from His navel.
15. Birtb of Brahmá - Lord Visnu entered tbat lotus flower, and impregnated it witb
all tbe modes, tben Brabmá, known as self-born (svayam-bhuvam), was born.
16. Brabmá, situated on tbe centre of tbe lotus, could not see tbe world. Wbile
moving bis eyes in tbe four directions to see, be obtained four heads.
17. Lord Brabmá could not perfectly understand tbe creation, tbe lotus or himself.
Note: Brahmá's bewilderment about the creation reveals that —> (i) it is difficult to
understand      the     mystery      of    creation     hy    mentái    speculation,
(ii) Brahmá's power to create is not his own, hut was coming from the Lord.
18-22:   Brahmá's desperate search for the Absolute truth
18. Brahmá contemplated - Wbo am I situated on tbe top of tbis lotus? Wberefrom
bas it sprouted? Tbere must be something from wbicb it is originating!
19. Brabmá, entered tbe lotus stem, went closer to tbe navel of Garbbodakasáyi
Visnu, but could not trace out tbe root.
Note: Personal endeavours are not sufficient for success; one needs the Lord's mercy
and sanction.
m     M      m    M     M     M     m    M     m     ^    m    m     M     m    ^      m   M        M   m
Canto 3 Overview.
20. While searching in that way, Lord Brahmá's duration of life was decreasing by
tbe influence of time (tbe cakra of Visnu).
21-22. Giving up bis unsuccessful search, Brabmá came back on to tbe top of tbe
lotus and concentrated bis mind on tbe Lord. After hundred buman years of
meditation, be could see tbe Lord in bis beart wbicb was not possible earlier.
Note: Brahmá's giving up his personal endeavours and taking to meditation on the
Lord is a sign of his self-surrender, which has been inspired by the Lord's mercy.
(Ref. 3.9.37-38).
23. Brabmá could see on tbe water, tbe gigantic wbite body of Sesa-nága, upon wbicb
tbe Lord (Garbbodakasáyi Visnu) was lying alone. Tbe jewels on tbe boods of Sesa-
nága illuminated all tbe directions.
24.                           preksám ksipantam haritopalddreh
sandhydbhra-níver      uru-rukma-múrdhnah
ratnodadhdrausadhi-saumanasya
vana-srajo   venu-bhujdnghripdnghreh
Feature of Lord's beauty                      Mocked the beauty of
Bodily lustre                                 Coral mountain
Yellowish garments                            Evening sky
Helmet bedecked with jewels                   Golden summit of the mountain
Limbs with ornaments, tulasi and garlands     Mountain with waterfails, herbs, etc.
25. Grandeur of Lord's body - Self-illuminated, well-ornamented and unlimited in
length and breadtb, occupied tbe tbree planetary systems.
26. Tbe Lord (Krsna) mercifully sbowed one lotus foot tbat awards all desired fruits
of pure bhakti (free from jndna and karma). His splendorous moonlike toenails
appeared like tbe petals of a flower.
pumsdrh sva-kdmdya vivikta-mdrgair
abhyarcatdrh kdma-dughdnghri-padmam
pradarsayantarh krpayd nakhendu-
mayükha-bhinndnguli-cdru-patram
JM.MMm.MmM.Mjm'M.MMM'M.m
27. The Lord acknowledged (sonayitena) the service of devotees with His beautiful
smile that vanquished their distress (mukhena lokarti-hara-smitena). His face was
pleasing with beautiful nose, eyebrows and the rays from His lips and earrings.
mukhena       lokárti-hara-smitena
parisphurat-kundala-manditena
sonáyitenádhara-bimba-bhásá
pratyarhayantam sunasena subhrvá
28. Yellow cloth —> resembled the saffron dust of kádamba
Waist    encircled by a well-decorated beit
Chest —> Srivatsa and an unlimitedly valuabie necklace
29. Lord compared to Sandalwood tree (His fame perfumes the whole universe)
Valuabie jewels and pearls on the arms          Fragrant flowers and hranches
Lord is origin of all others in the universe    Self-situated tree - roots cannot be seen
Protector of the whole world                    King of all trees
Covered hy many hoods of Ananta                 Covered hy many snakes
30. Lord compared to a great mountain
Garhhodakasáyi Visnu                                Great Mountain
Shelter of all moving and non-moving entities       Shelter of all creatures in the mountain
Lord Ananta is His friend (ahindra-bandhum)         Friend of the snakes
Thousands of golden-helmeted hoods of Ananta        Thousands of golden peaks
Decorated with valuabie jewels.                     Fiiled with jewels
Sometimes submerged in water of devastation         Sometimes submerged in the ocean
31. Seeing that the Lord was being glorified with Vedic wisdom hy the garlands on
His chest, surrounded by His weapons and associates and unapproacbable by
the devatás, Brahmá concluded that He is Lord H a r i .
32-33: Brahmá starts thinking about His service to the Lord
32. Brahmá could only see five factors - lotus in the Lord's navel, himself,
devastating water, drying air and the sky (ingredients for creation).
33. Thus being surcharged with the mode of passión. Lord Brahmá began to offer
his respectful prayers on the path of the creative mentality.
i      3 . 9 BRAHMÁ'S PRAYERS F O R CREATIVE ENERGY
m i á Z ^ : f '
1-25: Brahmá's prayers for creative impetus
T                                           T
6-10:               11-13: Lord's
14-21:
1-5: Lord's           Predicament of           reciprocation                              20-25:
Obeisances          Requests
Supreme Lorm |          the conditioned           with various
unto
souls                 devotees
1: Supreme                                   11: Pure            14: Brahman           20-21:
Knowable             6: Misident-         devotees -           and Bhagavan      Garbhodakasayí
object         I ification causes i | dwells in their
Visnu in yoga-
anxiety         hearts who see;
15: Merciful           nidrá
Him through
2: Origin of all                                                   holy names
7: Unfortunate           their ears
forms                                                                            22: Lmpower
people don't                                                 me to create
hear             i12: Demigods -'      16: The cosmic
3: Supreme                                                            tree
personal form                               I not satisfied
' 8: Miserable          : nondevotees -                          23: Protect me
jjlvas are pitiable                                              form falsé ego
i unavailable          17-18: The
4: Most
I   9: Bodily                                  Time factor
auspicious form                                                                        24: Save me
Identification |       13: People whoi                         from deviation
5: Dweller of      [     binds                 offer their         19: Various
devotees'                                   results - will     transcendental
10: Lrustration         become pure                           25: Please wake
hearts                                                            forms               up
iof nondevotees              gradually
Link: After seeing the wonderful                  form of Garhhodakasáyi             Visnu, Brahma     offers
prayers.
&'ÍÍ2*S^|ÍÍ'(Ö^^                                      Brahmá's Prayers For Creative Energy
1-25: BRAHMÁ'S PRAYERS FOR CREATIVE IMPETUS
1. Supreme knowable object
•   After years of penance, I am now able to know Y o u by Your mercy.
•   People who do not know You are unfortunate.
•   Nothing is comparable with Y o u . Impure objects appear superior to You because
of transformation of matériái modes of máyá.
2. T h e originál form - Your rüpam      ...
•   Manifested by Your internál potency {avabodha-rasodayena),
•   Always freed from matériái contamination {sasvat nivrtta tamasah),
•   For the sake of devotees   (sat-anugraháya),
•   Origin (ádau) I Root of hundreds of incarnations {avatára sata-eka-bijam),
•   From whose navel the lotus is sprouted on which I am born {yat        nábhi-padma
bhavanát aham ávirásam)
3. Supreme personal form - Your impersonal Brahman effulgence       (ánanda-mátram)
is without changes (avikalpam) or deterioration of potency (aviddha-varcah). But I
(proud of my body and senses) surrender unto Your transcendental personal form
{bhavatah svarüpam), which includes Brahman.
L i n k : Why surrender to a personal form only?
4. Most auspicious form - Sri Krsna's forms create auspiciousness for all the
universes (bhuvana-mangala mangaláya) and are manifested for the devotees. Persons
destined for hell (naraka-bhágbhih) neglect these personal forms and speculate on
matériái topics (asat-prasatigaih).
5. Dweller of devotees' hearts (who smell through ears) - Y o u are never separated
from the devotees' hearts who smell through their earholes, the aroma of Your lotus
feet, carried by the air of Vedic sound and accept those feet as the greatest treasure
through bhakti.
ye tu       tvadiya-caranámbuja-kosa-gandham
jighranti karna-vivaraih     sruti-váta-nitam
bhaktyá grhita-caranah parayá ca tesárh
nápaisi nátha hrdayámburuhát        sva-pumsám
6. Misidentification causes anxiety - As long as they do not take shelter of Your
safe lotus feet [anghrim abhayam), people imbued with the aham mameti conception,
are full of anxieties (árti-mülam)   for protecting their wealth, body, friends, etc.
L i n k : Then why doesn't everyone take to devotion?
i
7. Conditions of the unfortunate
•   Lost their intelligence (hata-dhiyah) due to offenses
•   Turnéd against the auspicious topics about You {bhavatah prasangdt)
•   Lngage in inauspicious activities {akusaláni) of temporary sense gratification
8. Miserable jivas are pitiable - M y mind is aggrieved for the poor creatures
constantly perplexed by hunger, thirst, kapha-pitta-vata, blasting beat, severe cold,
wind and rain, strong sex desire, indefatigable anger and other disturbing elements.
ksut-trt-tridhátubhir    ima muhur ardyamdnáh
sítosna-vdta-varasair   itaretardc ca
kámágninácyuta-rusá      ca sudurbharena
sampasyato mana urukrama sidate me
L i n k : Why do you lament for matériái existence since it is worthless?
9. Bodily Identification binds - As long as the jiva, being influenced by mdyd, sees
the hody as a means for sense enjoyment, he cannot get out of matériái miseries,
which otberwise have no factual existence.
10. Lrustration of Nondevotees
•    Lngage senses in distressing work
•    Suffer insomnia due to various mentái speculations      (ndnd-manoratha-dhiyá)
•    Lrustrated in their plans {dhata-artha racanáh)
•    Lven jnanis continue in samsdra, if they are averse to Your topics.
Note: 3.9.7 and 10 describe the fallen position of the nondevotees who do not take
shelter of the process of hearing about the Lord - distress, frustration and matériái
miseries.
11. Dweller of devotees' hearts (who see through ears) - Y o u mercifully reside in
the lotus-like hearts of devotees, which are infused with bhakti-yoga. They see You
through the ears (by hearing), in the form they always particularly think of.
tvam     bhakti-yoga-paribhdvita-hrt-saroja
dsse sruteksita-patho nanu nátha purhsám
yad-yad-dhiyá ta urugáya     vibhávayanti
tat-tad-vapuh pranayase      sad-anugraháya
Note: 3.9.5 and 11 describe the glorious position of the devotees who perform bhakti
by hearing about the Lord: through the médium of their ears, they smell the fragrance
of the Lord's lotus feet and see His form as well.
}mm:0M0MM3                                   3.9 Brahmá's Prayers For Creative Energy
12. Lord's reciprocation w i t h -
a. Demigods - not so satisfied, as they worship for matériái benefits.
h. Devotees - pleased, as they show mercy to all beings.
c. Nondevotees - unavailable
13. Actions offered to the Lord benefit - Activities like Vedic rituals, charity, severe
austerities and transcendental service performed with a view to worship You and to
satisfy Y o u never go in vain.
14. Brahman (worsbiped by jnánis) - realized by intelligence for self-realization.
Bhagaván (worsbiped by devotee) - as Garhhodakasáyi            Visnu He enjoys          (rásáya)
pastimes of creation, maintenance and dissolution.
Note: Brahmá indirectly offers obeisances to Krsna who enjoys {rásáya) rása-lild with
the gopis.
15. M e r c i f u l holy names - One who chants the holy names of the Lord, whose
incarnations, qualities and activities are mysterious, even unconsciously at the time of
death, is freed of all sins and attains H i m .
16. T h e cosmic tree - Y o u are the prime root of the tree of the cosmic manifestation
{bhuvana-drumáya),     which has three trunks - as me, Siva and Y o u , and expands
with multiple hranches.
17-18. T h e time factor - As long as the tendency for foolish work remains powerful
in people, all their plans will be cut to pieces, by powerful time. Although I am the
leader of all planets, performed years of austerities and stay for two parárdhas, still I
fear Your time factor.
Note: parárdha = 4,300,000,000 x 30 x 12 x 100 solar years.
19. Various transcendental forms - Y o u appear in various species, among animals,
humans and demigods to perform transcendental pastimes and also to fuifill the
obligations of Your own principles {átma-krta-setu).
20-21. Garbbodakasáyi V i s n u - You are happily sleeping {yoganidrá) on the snake
bed, in the violent waters of devastation with all the universes stationed within Your
abdomen. I am born from the lotus sprouted from Your navel. Now at the end of the
night of devastation, after finishing Your sleep, Y o u open Your eyes, which hloom
like lotuses. [Please wake up! I, Your servant, should perform mangala-árati for you.]
22-25: Requests to the Lord
22. Empower me - Y o u , endowed with six opulences, are the friend and maintainer
of all [samasta-jagatám  suhrd). Please empower me, with the introspection to create,
for I am also one of the surrendered souls (pranata).
23. Protect me from falsé ego - You are the benefactor of surrendered souls. When I
create this universe endowed with Your power, I wish to not be materially affected
by my works and ahle to give up the falsé prestige of being the creator.
esa prapanna-varado    ramayátma-saktyá
yad yat karisyati grhtta-gunávatárah
tasmin sva-vikramam idam srjato 'pi ceto
yunjita karma-samalam ca yathá vijahyám
24. Save me from deviation - In the course of manifesting Your diverse energies in
the form of the cosmic manifestation, may I not be deviated from the vibration of the
Vedic hymns [ma ririsista nigamasya girám visargah).
25. Please wake up - May the Lord who is the Supreme, the oldest and unlimitedly
merciful, smilingly hestow His benediction by opening His lotus eyes. He can uplift
the entire cosmic creation and dispel my sorrow by speaking His sweet directions.
so 'sáv adabhra-karuno bhagaván   vivrddha-
prema-smitena nayanámburuham      vijrmbhan
uttháya visva-vijayáya ca no visádam
mádhvyá girápanayatát purusah puránah
26. Thus having prayed as far as his mind and words would permit him, Brahmá
became silent, as if tired from his activities of penance, knowledge and meditation.
27-28. Having understood the intention of Brahmá, who was anxious (visanna-
cetasam) about creation and depressed (parikhidyatah) upon seeing the water of
devastation, the Lord spoke in deep, thoughtful words, removing the illusion.
29-43:   SUPREME LORD'S REPLY TG BRAHMA
29. Do not be anxious or depressed about the execution of creation. What you are
begging for has already been granted.
30. T a p a and vidyá gives ásraya - By situating yourself in penance {tapa) and
knowledge (vidyá), you will receive my favor (mad-ásrayám)       and thus understand
from within your heart, everything regarding the position of the planets.
^t'éí''t^éí^'&'éí'^2^éí''&'éí              "Ö           3.9 Brahmá's Prayers For Creative Energy
31-32. B h a k t i gives transcendental vision - By complete absorption in devotional
service (bhakti-yuktah samáhitah), during your creative activities, you will (i) see Me
in you, the universe and all living entities, (ii) see yourself, the universe and all living
entities in Me - only then will you be free from all illusion.
Note: Here the Lord indicates that during the brahma-vimohana-lilá, Brahmá will see
the Lord expand into many gopas and calves and will again see the universes within
the Lord.
33. G i v i n g up bodily conception gives realization - When you are free from bodily
conception and the influence of modes, you will realize your pure form [svarüpa) and
attain a relationship with Me {svárdjyam) in dásya-rasa, sakhya-rasa, etc.
29-43: Supreme Lord's Reply to Brahma
X
I 29-33: Follow penance
41-43:1 am the
I and devotion and then        34-40: The Lord's mercy
and benedictions offered                  dearmost of all, and I am
I you will see everything in
the one to be satisfied
relation to Me       \
29: Do not be                  34: My mercy on you will
increase                        41: The ultimate
anxious                                                           goal is to invoke
My satisfaction
30: Attain mercy              35. Rajo-guna will not bind you
by penance and
perseverance                36: You understood Me since                 42: I am the
You know My form as                   ultimate dearest
transcendental                          object
31-32:
Transcendental
vision of absorbed           37:1 manifested within you when             43: Follow My
devotee                       you are searching                     instructions
33: Stage of               38: By My causeless mercy you
attaining the Ford                 lave offered prayers
39:1 am pleased by your prayers |
140: All desires will be fulfilled for
j    one who prays like this
I   Canto 3 OvervieNA«HB[jTái''i2j^^^
34. Expanding service attracts mercy - Since you desire to sérve by expanding the
population, you shall never be deprived in this service and My mercy on you will
continually increase [varsiydn mad-anugrahah).
35. Rajo-guna w i l l not bind you - Since your mind is fixed on Me, the vicious mode
of passión will not bind you, although you are engaged in creation.
36. Unknowable became known - Although I am difficult to be understood
(durvijneyo), you understood My personality, because you know that My form
constitutes nothing matériái (matériái elements, senses, modes and falsé ego - like
that of a conditioned soul).
37. I manifested within you - While you entered the stem of the lotus searching for
Me, I manifested My form from within you (darsito abahih) to make you successful.
38. Your prayers, penances and firm faith in Me - are by M y causeless mercy alone.
yac cakarthánga mat-stotram         mat-kathdbhyudayánkitam
yad vd tapasi te nisthá sa esa mad-anugrahah
39. I am pleased by your description of Me as the possessor of transcendental
qualities (gunamayam) and devoid of matériái qualities (nirgunam). Let there be
auspiciousness for you.
40. Phala-sruti - As I am the Lord of all benediction (varesvarah), I will fuifill all the
desires of one who prays regularly like you, and thus worships Me.
41. The ultimate goal of all pious acts, penances, sacrifices, charities, mystic
activities, trances, etc, is to invoke M y satisfaction.
pürtena tapasá yajnair ddnair  yoga-samádhind
rdddham nihsreyasarh pumsdrh mat-pritis tattvavin-matam
42. The ultimate dearest object - Since I am the Supersoul, the supreme director
and the dearest of all objects, the body, family, etc, also become dear to people. But
in reality they should only be attached to Me.
aham átmdtmandm dhdtah presthah san preyasdm api
ato mayi ratim kurydd dehddir yat-krte priyah
43. By following M y instructions you can now generate the living entities as before,
hy the hody composed of the Vedic wisdom.
44. After thus instructing Brahmá, the primeval Lord disappeared.
3.10 Divisions Of The Creation
3 . 1 0 DIVISIONS O F T H E CREATION
4 * ; r
1-3: Vidura's
inquiries About             How did Brahmá create from hisi
body and mind?
Brahmá's creation
Brahmá meditated on the Lord
4-9: Lord Brahmá               for 100 years, entered the
creates the               whorl of the lotus and divided it
3 . 1 0 Divisions           fourteen worlds              into three divisions and then
of The                                               into fourteen divisions
Creation                   11-13:
Characteristics of
Time                       14: 3 types of Destruction
14-30: Ten divisons              15-17:6 types of primary
of creation                          creation
18-29: 4 types of secondary
creation
1-3: VIDURA'S INQUIRIES ABOUT BRAHMÁ'S CREATION
1-2. V i d u r a inquired: H o w did Brahmá, the grandfather of all planetary inhabitants
(loka-pitámahah)      create the bodies of living entities from his own body and mind?
Kindly eradicate all my doubts, and answer all my inquiries.
3. Being enlivened, Maitreya began to reply the questions, which he had kept in his
heart (did not forget).
Canto 3 Overview    ^MMMM^MMMMMMMMMMM.
4-9: LORD BRAHMA CREATES THE FOURTEEN WORLDS
4. Brahmá meditated on the Lord for hundred celestial years as advised by the Lord.
5. He saw both the lotus and the water trembling due to a strong, violent wind.
6. Due to long penance (tapa) and transcendental knowledge (vidyá) [as told by the
Lord in 3.9.30], lord Brahmá acquired practical knowledge (vivrddha-vijnána)  and
drank the wind and the water completely.
7. Brahmá then saw that the lotus spread throughout the universe, and contemplated,
"Lrom this lotus, I will create all the planets as they were before the destruction."
8. Thus engaged in the Lord's service, Brahmá entered into the whorl of the lotus and
first divided it into three divisions and later into fourteen divisions.
9. Brahmá could create all the fourteen worlds suitable for different types of jlvas
because of his causeless devotional service in mature transcendental knowledge.
L i n k : Maitreya    had spoken about 'time' several times previously    in 3.8.12, 3.8.13,
3.8.22 and 3.10.5. Therefore, Vidura now asks about time.
10. Vidura asked, "Describe the symptoms of eternal time, which is another form of
the L o r d . "
11-13:   CHARACTERISTICS OF TIME
(i)   Source of the interactions of modes     (guna-vyatikarákáro)
(ii)   Lack of attributes and hence imperceptible (nirviseso)
(iii)   Limitless - without beginning or end (apratisthitah)
(iv)    (As an instrumental cause,) Separates the matériái energy from the Lord
(visvam isvarena paricchinnath)
(v)   Divides the universe into various planetary systems (visvath paricchinnath)
(vi)   Unmanifested, impersonal feature of Lord       (avyakta-mürtiná)
(vii)   Objective manifestation or representative of Lord       (brahma-tan-mátrath)
(viii)   Causes the universe to appear alike in the present, as it was in the past and shall
be in the future (tdrsam).
L i n k : Having described time in generál, Maitreya    will describe time in detail in the
next chapter (3.11). Before that he discusses the process of creation in summary.
3.10 Divisions Of The Creation
14-30:   TEN TYPES OF CREATION
14: 3 Types of destruction
Kala                               Dravya                           Guna
Due to eternal time              Due to matériái elements        Due to one's own actions
Devastation of all              By the fire of Sankarsana        Consumption of one's
universes                        and other factors                 own body
End of Brahmá's life                End of Brahmá's day
15-17: 6 Types of Primary Creation (prakrta sárga)
T
Mahat-        Aharikára -         Tan-mátrá       Indriya -         Deva -          Tamás -
tattva -       Falsé ego \         - Sense         Senses          Demigods        Ignorance
sum totál of                          objects                          & mind
matériái
ingredients          Maierial                                                             produced
ingredients          Dravya-     Knowledge          Interaction       by avidyá-
- Dravya (5         saktimán -      senses            of sattva-      s'akti. Makes
elements)         generates 5                         guna             the living
Guna-                               gross I ^
vaisamyam                                                                                  entity
elements ! !_ 5 Action                           (prabhu) act;
-Interaction       Matériái
of modes                                           senses                              like a fool
knowledge
instigated       -Jhána
by Supreme           (sense
Lord          devatás,
mind &
knowledge
senses) i
Matériái
actions -
Kriyá
(Action
senses)
Canto 3 Overview,                'BMmm€m0Mm:0Mm
18-29: Four types of Secondary Creation by Brahmá (Visarga or Vaikrta)
Lower
Immovable!                                                   Humán
species -                                j Demigods I
jivas - Plantsj                                                beings
Animals
I
Character                          Character •                   Character 1        r
-istics         6 types            -istics       28 types        -istics              8 types
Conscious    Vanaspatayah     Horizontal       -r   u     j ! lj    Downward           Vibudhas -
-ness not      - without    nourishment                            nourishment         demigods
evident   r flowers but
having fruit   No concept j                                                 Pitfs - I
Upward               — — |- of future, I One hooved                Passionate         forefathers i
nourishment: Osadhayah -      deliberation ;
jannual plants „                                       Dedicated to i           Asuras -
Leel pain                           ' : ' T" "! Live clawed !         work     í            demons
when cut      Latá - plants Preoccupied
that need     with eating : j Birds - land i           Think           Gandharvas
Unlimited       support                     H dwelling and ;       themselves         and Apsarás
and sleeping i                         happy even
varieties                   Understand j aquatic
Tvaksara - •i their needs                            in distress        Yaksas and
by smell                                                 Ráksasas
Hollow plants:
(bamboo) j                                          Only 1 type          Siddhas,
Cáranas and
Virudhah -                                                          Vidyádharas
stiff trunk,
no support           Note:                                            Bhütas,
needed                                                             Pretas and
Prakrta or sárga is primary                       Pisácas
Drumáh -             creation and is done by the Lord.
give fruit                                                            Kinnaras,
through             Vaikrta or visarga is secondary                 Kimpurusas
flowers             creation and is done by Brahmá.                 and others
27. Creation of sense devatas (from ahankdra in sattva-guna) comes under prakrta.
Creation of other devatás by Brahmá comes under vaikrta.
Creation of the four Kumáras is mixed creation (both prákrta and vaikrta), as they
were generated by Brahmá's meditation on the Lord (thus both Brahmá and the Lord
are the cause).
30. I shall describe the manvantaras and the descendants of the Manus. The creator,
Brahmá, as the incarnation of the passión mode of the Lord, creates the universal
affairs with unfailing desires (amogha-sankalpa) by the force of the Lord's energy.
6      •t5         3.11 Calculation of Time, From The Atom
'^MMMimMM'
3 . 1 1 CALCULATION O F TIME, F R O M T H E A T O M
1-4: Time also has small and big divisions like matter
5-15: Divisions of time
16-17: Vidura's inquiry about those who are beyond one
kalpa
3.11
18-22: Duration of yugas
Calculation of
Time, from the
23-27: Duration of Manus
Atom
28-32: Destruction at the end of kalpa
33-37: Brahmá's lifespan
38-42: Insignificance of Brahmá's lifespan and the universe |
Link: Vidura requested Maitreya             to describe about eternal time in 3.10.10. Now
Maitreya describes the details of time.
-15: CALCULATION OF TIME FROM DIVISIONS OF DISTANCE
Link: Finding the nature of subtle time difficult        to describe, Maitreya first describes
the divisions of matter (3.11.1-4).
Note: Time and space are two correlative terms. Time is measured in terms of its
covering a certain space of atoms by the movement of the sun (3.11.4 P).
1. Paramanu (atom) —> matériái manifestation's ultimate smallest partiele, which is
indivisible and invisible. They are innumerable such particles.
2. Parama-mahán —> totality of all the paramdnus (greatest partiele of matter).
3. Just as matter has small and big divisions, time also has similar divisions. Time is
the potency of the all-pervading Lord.
ímm0mmMM0M0miMMM:0Mm:0jm                                                                         •'Z**4
i
Canto 3 Overview            ^^33.y**'^.=33jy9^\,33.y'**^,.3'^*l^\233^
4. Paramanutam (atomic time)            time covered by the sun in passing over an atom
(smallest division of time).
Parama-mahán time           time expended from the beginning of creation till the
dissolution of the universes.
5-12: DIVISIONS OF TIME
w f3^Wl^% v.f7^fM ^^^^^MipW                                        Modern time (approx.)
Paramanu (atom)             The smallest partiele
Anu (double atom)           2 Paramdnus
Trasarenu (hexatom)        3 Anus
Truti                      Time taken by sun to pass 3 Trasarenus 8/13,500 second
Vedha                      100 Trutis                             8/135 second
Lava                        3 Vedhas                                 8/45 second
Nimesa                      3 havas                                  8/15 second
Ksana                       3 Nimesas                                8/5 second
Kástha                     5 Ksanas                                 8 seconds
Laghu                      15 Kdsthds                               2 minutes
Nádiká or Danda            15 Laghus                                30 minutes
Muhürta                    2 Dandas                                 1 hour
Prahara or Ydma            6 or 7 Dandas (not muhürta)              3 hours
Day + Night                4 + 4 Praharas                           24 hours
Fortnight                  15 Days and Nights                       15 days
Month                      2 Fortnights (1 complete day and         30 days
night for the Pitá planets)
Season                     2 Months                                 2 Months
Ayana (Movement of Sun      6 Months                                6 Months
from south to north)
Year^                       2 Ayanas of Sun (one complete day       12 Months
and night for the demigods)
^ Measuring one nddikd or danda (3.11.9) - The time it takes for the water to overflow when a
copper pot of six-pzz/ű-weight [14 ounce], in which a hole is bored with a gold probe weighing 4
mdsa and measuring 4 fingers long is placed on the water.
^ Humán being's life duration is 100 years.
MmmMMmM.mmmMmMMm
13-14. Five types of year - Different luminaries and planets rotate in their respective
orbits of time forming their own years as follows:
Name of Year       Luminary               Earthly calculation
sarhvatsara        Sun                    365.25 days
parivatsara       Jupiter (Brbaspati)     11.87 years
vatsara           27 constellations       324 days
anuvatsara         Moon                   327.6 days
idá-vatsara        Other constellations   360 days
15. One should worship the sun once every five years because he (i) enlivens with
his beat and light, (ii) diminishes life duration and thus releases from matériái
illusion and (iii) enlarges the path of elevation to heaven.
THE KALPA OF BRAHMA
16. 1 understand the lifespans of beings in Svarga, Pitá and earthly planets. Please
describe the life span of others (like Bhrgu) who are beyond the kalpa of Brahmá.
17. Because you are a self-realized person, you can understand the movements of
eternal time and can see everything by the power of mystic vision.
L i n k : The life spans of those beyond a kalpa are equal to that of Brahmá.   In order to
explain the lifespan of Brahmd, Maitreya first explains the calculation ofthe yugas.
18-22:   DURATION OF YÜI
18.1 Catur-yuga (Satya, Tretá, Dvápara and Kali) = 12,000 years of the demigods.
19. Duration of the four yugas
Kali                    1,200                 432,000
Dvápara                 2,400                 864,000
Tretá                   3,600                 1,296,000
Satya                  4,800                 1,728,000
1 catur-yuga (totál)    12,000               4,320,000
¥:m:0jmM0Mm:0Mm:0M0MM
Canto 3 Overvie
20. A yuga during which particular yuga-dharmas are practiced, is the time duration
between two yuga-sandhyds (transitional periods).
21. I n Satya-yuga, dharma was completely maintained, but it gradually decreased by
VZ part in every next yuga while adharma is proportionately admitted.
22. Above Svargaloka (Maharloka to Brahmaloka), the duration of one day = 1000
catur-yugas; the night during which Brahmá sleeps is also of the same duration.
23-27:   DURATION OF MANUS        ^/jjjj^/Z/Z
23. At the end of Brahmá's night, the creation of the planets (from Svargaloka to
Pátálaloka) takes place and stays through the lifespans of fourteen Manus.
24. Ruling time of 1 Manu = little more than 71 catur-yugas. (852,000 demigod years
or 306,720,000 humán years)
25. In a manvantara, (i) seven Sages, (ii) demigods, (iii) Indra, and (iv) Manu appear
simultaneously, but (v) Manu's descendants appear gradually.
Note: There are six elements of a manvantara namely manu, manu-putras, devatas,
sapta-rsis, suresvara, and amsávatdra of the Lord (Ref. 12.7.15). Canto 8 describes
the six elements of all the fourteen manvantaras of the current kalpa of Brahmá.
26. I n the daily creation of Brahmá, the three planetary systems revolve, and their
residents appear and disappear according to their karmas.
27. During the manvantaras, the Lord appears in different incarnations [manvantara
avatdras), as Manu and others and maintains the universe.
28-32:   DESTRUCTION AT THE END OF KALPA
28. The Lord, in the form Kalagni-rudra, destroys the three worlds at the end of
Brahmá's day. The jivas remain mérged in that dissolution, and everything is silent.
29. At that time, the three worlds disappear and the sun and moon are without glare.
30. During this time, the residents of Maharloka, distressed by the fire emanating
from the mouth of Sankarsana, move to Janaloka.
31. At the beginning of devastation all the oceans swell and cover the three worlds.
32. Garhhodakasáyi Visnu remains in that water, lying on Ananta, while being
glorified by the residents of Janaloka.
•^éí'^&'éí'''&'ÍÍ'&'éí''&'tí                  'Sí •          3.11 Calculation of Time, From The Atom
f'^'^Kd^ -J^3!Myfi3^-^*^   M!r                 *!• .„^^^^^             a.a.r.xuii^.tr--fM- Iium-,i. i im]mM%
33-37:   LIFESPAN OF BRAHMA
33. Thus, days and nights pass even for Brahma and his life also comes to an end.
One's life endures for only 100 years, in terms of the times in different planets.
34. Parárdha - Half of Brahmá's life (50 years). The first parárdha                        is already over
and the second has begun currently.
35. Bráhma-kalpa - The first day in the first parárdha oí Brahmá's life (also called
Sveta-varáha-kalpa), during which Brahmá is born along with the four Vedas.
36. Pádma-kalpa - The next kalpa which followed the first kalpa (also called Pitr-
kalpa), in which the universal lotus comes from the navel of Garhhodakasáyi Visnu.
37. Varáha-kalpa - The first day of the second parárdha                       of Brahmá's life, during
which Lord H a r i appeared as Boar.
IN FRONT OF THE LORD                                                 \
38. This dvi-parardha (entire life of Brahmá) is only a nimesa (less than a second) for
the Lord, who is unchanging (avyákrtasya),        unlimited (anantasya), beginningless
(anádeh) and the soul of the universe    (jagad-átmanah).
39. Time is the controller of anyone who is bodily conscious, with life spans between
paramanu and dvi-parardha. But, time cannot control the Supreme Lord.
40-41. The universes with 500 millión yojanas (4 biliion miles; 1 yojana = 8 miles)
diameter and the layers of elements covering the universes each ten times thicker than
the one before, looks as small as a paramanu when they come out of the bodily pores
of Mahá-visnu.
42. Sri Krsna is therefore the originál cause of all causes. Thus the spiritual abode of
Mahá-visnu is eternal and supreme.
Canto 3 Overview
3 . 1 2 CREATION O F T H E KUMÁRAS A N D OTHERS
2: Facilitates the conditioned soul's stay in matériái
1-3: Five ajnana-                           worid
vrttis
3: Brahmá was DiSPLFASFD
4-6: Four     J 4-5: Brahma asked them to create progeny; they
Kumáras from                          refused
vidya     í N          6: Brahma was DISRESPECTED
J
7-10: Rúdra born from Brahmá's anger
11-14: Rudra's eleven names, residences and wives
7-20: Rúdra
born from             15-16: Rudra's progeny started devouring
Brahmá's anger i           everything. Brahmá was DISTURBED
17-20: Brahma told Rúdra to stop creation and do
penance
3.12             21-27: Various ! . 21-24,27: 10 sons headed by Marici; and Kardama
Creation of i       manifestations \/^
Kumáras            from Brahmá's ; -..^ 25-26: Dharma, Adharma and factors that instigate
body and mind \                        Adharma
and others
28: Brahmá was DISTRACTED by being inciined
towards his daughter Vák
29-32: Brahmá's sons tried to dissuade him but
failed; so they prayed to Supreme Ford
33: Brahmá, ashamed, gave up that mentality
Four Vedas, Upavedas, Pancama-veda, karma-
tantram, four legs of dharma, ás'ramas, arts, Vedic
meters and aiphabets
50-52: Brahmá saw DEFFICIENCY in the creation by;
50-57:                             the sages
Sváyambhuva          53-55: From his body Sváyambhuva Manu and
Manu and                        Satarüpá appeared
Satarüpá
56-57: Manu and his wife continued the creation
^^tV'&t^ti''^&'íí''^^ií'&'ií                *3         3.12 Creation Of The Kumaras And Others
,     r'^Vfj V . •           1-3:   BRAHMA FIRST CREATES IGNORANCE
1. Maitreya - I described to you about time. Now hear about Brahmá's creation.
L i n k : Unless a living entity forgets his real identity as the eternal servant of            Lord
Krsna, it is impossible for him to live in matériái          conditions of life. So, Brahmd first
created ignorance as a matter of necessity.
2 . Lord Brahmá created the 5 features of ignorance               (ajhdna-vrttis)
sasarjdgre 'ndha-támisram       atha támisram ádi-krt
mahdmoham ca mohám ca           tamás cdjhdna-vrttayah
(i)   tamah     Darkness in self-knowledge or self deception (ignorance of svarüpa)
(ii)   mohám —>• Illusory bodily conception (forgetfulness of one's real identity)
(iii)   mahd-moham      Falsé proprietorship of enjoyable objects (possessiveness)
(iv)    támisram —>• Anger upon frustration (when one's enjoyment is obstructed)
(v)    andha-támisram  -+ Unconscious state brought about by anger (sense of death)
3. Seeing the sinful nature of his creation (pápiyasím srstirii), Brahmá was displeased.
He then purified his mind by medirating on the Lord and again began the creation.
4-6: CREATION OF THE FOUR KUMÁRAS
4. Brahma created the four Kumaras who were free of fruitive actions (niskriyan) as
their semen flowed upwards   (ürdhva-retasah).
Note: The four aspects of vidyá (knowledge) namely sánkhya, yoga, vairágya and
tapas appeared in the form of Sanaka, Sananda, Sanátana and Sanat-kumára
respectively. Since vidyá is useless without bhakti, bhakti also is present in them, but
as a secondary item.
5. Brahmá asked the Kumáras to create progeny, but they refused as they were
devoted to Lord Vásudeva (vásudeva-paráyanáh) and aimed only at liberation.
6. T h u s disrespected by his sons, Brahmá was angered, but he tried to control it.
7 - 2 0 : CREATION OF RÚDRA
7. Despite Brahmá's efforts to control his anger by intelligence, it came out from
between his eyebrows as a child with blue (ignorance) and red (passión) complexion
(nila-lohitah).
8. The child cried, " O destiny maker (dháta) and teacher of the universe (jagad-guru),
please designate my name and place."
^                     -            _.       __.                                          J-A^
9-10. Brahmá pacified the child hy accepting his request and said, " O best of the
demigods (sura-srestha), because you cried anxiously, your name will be Rúdra."
11. " I selected eleven places for y o u . " (Eleven residences of Rúdra principle or anger)
(i) Heart - falsé egocentric attitűdé of thinking oneself to be all in all.
(ii) Senses - the anger in the heart is manifested through senses
(iii) A i r of life - angry man breathes rapidly
(iv) Sky - dense clouds roar in anger
(v) A i r - wind hlows very fiercely
(vi) Water - flood; sea water infuriated by wind —>• appears gloomy
(vii) Fire - ablaze
(viii) E a r t h - transforms into weapons; inundation; earthly creatures like snake and
tiger
(ix) Sun - extrémé beat leads to heatstroke or even death
(x) Moon - extrémé cold leads to collapse or even death
(xi) Austerity (without bhakti) - somé yogis, philosophers and renunciants
12. " Y o u have eleven names - Manyu, Manu, Mahinasa, Mahán, Siva, Rtadhvaja,
Ugraretá, Bhava, Kála, Vámadeva and Dhrtavrata."
13. " Y o u have eleven wives called Rudránis - Dhi, Dhrti, Rasalá, Umá, Niyut, Sarpi,
Ilá, Ambiká, Irávati, Svadhá and Díksá."
14. "Accept these places and wives and create progeny on a large scale."
15-16. Rúdra created progeny similar to himself in strength (sattva), form (ákrti) and
furious nature (svabháva).    The unlimited progeny created by Rúdra attempted to
devour the entire universe and Brahmá became afraid.
17-19. Brahmá told Rúdra, "There is no need to create such living entities who
are devastating everything and even attacking me. Please perform austerity so that
you can (i) achieve auspiciousness, (ii) hestow happiness to all jivas, (iii) re-create
the universe as before and (iv) quickly know the Lord.
20. Rúdra agreed and went to the forest to perform austerity.
Jf.)
3.12 Creation Of The Kumaras And Others
MANIFESTATION                         BORN FROM BRAHMÁ'S
' 2 1 2 4 : 1 0 Sons of Brahmá
Nárada                                 Deliberation (best part of his body)
Vasistha                               Breatbing
Daksa                                  Thumb
Bhrgu                                  Touch
Kratu                                  Hand
Pulastya                               Ears
Ahgirá                                 Mouth
Atri                                   Eyes
Marici                                 Mind
Pulaha                                 Navel of Brahmá
25: Dharma and Adharma
Religion (dharma)                      Right breast, where Paramátmá is situated
Irreligion (adharma)                   Back, where jiva's death takes
26: Factors which instigate adharma
Lust and desire                        Heart
Anger                                  Between eyebrows
Greed                                  Lips
Power of speaking (vak)                Mouth
Ocean                                  Penis
Low and abominable activities          Anus, the source of all sins
27: Kardama                            Shadow / splendor
28-33:    VÁK FPISODE
2 8 . We have heard that Brahmá was attracted to his daughter Vák, though she wasn't.
Note: The phrase 'we have heard' reveals Maitreya Muni's hesitation and offenseless
attitűdé in narrating this incident. Although this shouldn't be spoken, he speaks ahout
this only to give knowledge that the strong senses could hewilder even a most learned
person and that one should he extremely careful while associating with the opposite
sex. This phrase also indicates that this incident must have happened in somé other
kalpa in which Brahmá had not yet heard the catuh-sloki Bhágavatam.
'W:mM.M:mMMm'M.MMMM.MMjm.MMM:
I      canto 3 Overview    JBriffr^^^^^^^
29-31. Seeing Brahmá so deluded, his sons, the sages headed by Marici spoke to him
with great respect as follows.
(i) This kind of act was never done before and will never be done in future
(ii) This does not befit your position as the supreme being in this universe
(iii) Your character is followed by people in generál for spiritual improvement
32. As their efforts failed to dissuade Brahmá, they all prayed to the Supreme Lord
who created the cosmos, to protect dharma.
33. Hearing his Prajápati sons, Brahmá was ashamed of his act, and gave up his body
(mentality), which appeared in all directions as fog in darkness (nihdram).
Link: The status of exalted personalities is not contaminated by apparently audacious
transgression of morality. Brahmá's          power of creation did not diminish due to his
distraction because of Vák. Brahmá continued his creation         service.
34-37: Four Vedas (to guide Brahma in creation) and catur-hotrarii
Rg Veda, Activities of Hota (sastra - chanting of mantras)       Eastern mouth
Yajur Veda, Activities of Adhvaryu {ijyá - sacrificial           Southern mouth
performance)
Sama-veda, Activities of the Udgátá (stuti-stomam - singing      Western mouth
verses)
Atharva Veda, Activities of Brahmá [práyascittam - remediai      Northern mouth
measure)
38: Upavedas (Supplemcntary Vedas)
Áyur-veda (medical science)                                      Eastern mouth
Dhanur-veda (military art)                                       Southern mouth
Gándharva-veda (musical art)                                     Western mouth
Sthdpatya-veda (architectural science)                           Northern mouth
39: Pancama-veda (Fifth Veda)
Puranas and Itihasas                                             All mouths
40: Karma-tantram (Sacrificial Acts)
Sodasi and uktha recitations for sacrifices                      Eastern mouth
Purisi (preparation of fire) and agnistoma sacrifices            Southern mouth
Áptorydma and átiratra sacrifices                                Western mouth
wmmM.MMmmmm}mMMMM^
3.12 Creation Of The Kumaras And Others
Vájapeya (horse) and gosava (cow) sacrifices                    Northern mouth
41-43: Four legs of Dharma, Four ásramás and their vrttis (vocations) and types
Four legs of Dharma:                                            Four mouths
vidyá - knowledge, dánam - charity, tapah - austerity, satyarh
- truth. [Knowledge and charity are equivalent to purity
(saucam) and mercy (dayá) respectively. Ref 1.17.24]
Four ásramás:                                                       Body
brahmacarya - student life, grhastha - household life,
vánaprastha - retired life, sannyása - renounced life
Four types of brahmacarya:
Sávitra - celihacy for three nights                                 Eastern mouth
Prájápatya - celihacy for a year,                                   Southern mouth
Bráhmana - celihacy until learning of Vedas                         Western mouth
Brhat - celihacy until death                                        Northern mouth
Four occupations of grhasthas:
Yártá - occupations not forhidden (like agriculture)                Eastern mouth
Sahcaya - performing sacrifices                                     Southern mouth
Sálina - taking aims without hegging                                Western mouth
Silohchana - taking the fallen grains in the field                  Northern mouth
Four types of vánaprasthas:
Vaikkánasa - live on wild grains                                    Eastern mouth
Válakhilya - gives up accumulated grains on gaining new grains      Southern mouth
Audumbara - lives off what he acquires hy walking in the
direction he sees on getting up the morning                         Western mouth
Phenapa - lives off grains or fruit that naturally have falién on
the ground                                                          Northern mouth
Four types of sannyásis:
Kuticaka - focusses on karma in his own hermitage                   Eastern mouth
Bahvoda - rejects action and focuses on jnána                       Southern mouth
Hamsa - fixed in knowledge                                          Western mouth
Niskriya - attained realization                                     Northern mouth
44: Arts, Sciences and celebrated Hymns
Logic (anviksiki), Vedic goals (dharma, artha, moksa), law and      Four mouths
order (danda), morál codes (nitih)                                  (East to Northern)
Bhüh, bhuvah, svah and their combination                            Four mouths
Pranava orhkára                                                     Heart
Canto 3 OverviewPIWIjjTipt^ilí^^^^^
45-46: Vedic meters and Verse writing
Usnik (28 syllables), the art of literary expression                     Bodily hairs
Gáyatn (24 syllables), the principal Vedic hymn                          Skin
Tristup (AA syllables)                                                   Flesh/ muscles
Anustup (32 syllables)                                                    Veins
Jagati (48 syllables)                                                     Bones
Pankti (40 syllables), the art of writing verse                           Bone marrow
Brhati (36 syllables), another type of verse writing                     Prána
47: Audible sounds, vaikhari (sabda-brahma) (13 vowels and 35 consonants)
Sparsa (touch aiphabets) - five classes of consonants with their Soul/ life
nasals (25 letters)
Svára (vowels) - a, á, i , I, u, ü, r, f, 1, e, ai, o, au (13 letters)   Body
Üsmánam (sibilant aiphabets) - sa, sa, sa, ha, arh, aha (5 letters)      Senses
Antah-sthdh (semi vowels) - ya, ra, la, va (4 letters)                    Strength
Sapta-svarás (seven musical notes) - sa, r, gá, ma, pa, dha, ni          Sensual activities
48. Brahmá, whose body is composed of the Vedas, is invested with multifarious
energies and is the personal representation of the Supreme Lord.
49. Giving up his previous body, Brahmá accepted a new body in which sex life is not
forhidden and concentrated his mind on creation.
50-57:     CREATION OF SVÁYAMBHUVA MANU AND SATARÜPÁ
50-51. Seeing that the creation by the powerful sages did not sufficiently increase the
population of the universe, Brahmá reflected, " H o w astonishing! This misfortune is
because of destiny."
52. While Brahmá was thus deliberating, two forms (one male and one female) were
generated from his body. They were still celebrated as Brahmá's body (káya).
53-55. They were Sváyambhuva Manu and his queen Satarüpá who united and
gradually increased the population of the universe.
56. In due course of time, they begot five children - two sons, Priyavrata and
Uttánapáda, and three daughters, Áküti, Devahüti and Prasüti.
57. Áküti was married to the sage Ruci, Devahüti to Kardama, and Prasüti to Daksa.
From them, the world was fiiled with population.
3.13 Appearance Of Lord Varáha
^                             . ' # v # : . f . ,
3 . 1 3 APPEARANCE O F LORD VARÁHA
1-3: I am eager to hear what the originál and saintly j
1-5: Inquiries by           king Manu did after getting his wife?        |
Vidura about
Manu            4: Greatest goal of hearing from guru is to hear
about pure devotees
6-8: Manu asks
Brahmá                       How may we sérve you?
9-10: You have the qualities of an ideál son
9-137Brahmá         11: Béget progeny, Rule earth and Worship the
Lord
instructs Manu
12-13: Protect people and please the Lord else
one's efforts are useless labor
14-15: Manu's
reply                    I abide. Please retrieve the earth.
16-19: While Brahmá contemplated, a small Boar
came out of his nostril and expanded Himself.
3.13      16-30: Pastimes
of Sveta-varáha      20-27: Brahmá and sages wondered. Lord Varaha
Appearance                                 roared and the sages glorified.
of Lord
Varáha                          28-30: Lord dived into ocean and lifted the Earth
31-33: Pastimes      The Lord killed Hiranyáksa and held the earth on
of Nila-varáha                          His tusks
34-38: Varáha's body as the form of sacrifice
39: Obeisances to Lord Varáha
40-42: Elephant holding lotus, mountain with
34-45: Prayers                 clouds, father with mother
by the sages
43: Only You could do this
44: We are purified by You
45: Bestow good fortune on all
46-50: Lord       46-47: Lord placed the earth on water and returned
returns and
phala-sruti            48-50: Power of hearing about the Lord
1-5: INQUIRIES BY VIDURA ABOUT SVÁYAMBHUVA MAN
1. Hearing the virtuous words of Maitreya, Vidura, who adored the topics of Lord
Vásudeva (vásudeva-kathádrtah)  inquired as follows.
2. What did Sváyambhuva Manu do after getting bis wife?
3. I am eager to bear witb faitb (sraddadhánaya)      about tbat originál and saintly king
(ádi raja, rájarsi), because be bas taken shelter of tbe Lord    (visvaksenásraya).
4. Tbe greatest goal of bearing from a spiritual master is to bear about sucb pure
devotees, because tbey always tbink of Lord Mukunda's lotus feet in tbeir hearts.
srutasya pumsánt sucira-sramasya
nanv anjasá süribhir idito 'rthah
tat-tad-gunánusravanarh     mukunda-
pádáravindarh hrdayesu yesám
5. Being influenced by tbe spirit of gentle and meek Vidura, on wbose lap (like a
pillow - upadhánam) Lord Krsna (sahasra-sirsna) was pleased to place His lotus feet,
Maitreya began to reply.
6-15: CONVERSATION BETWEEN BRAHMÁ AND MANU
6. After bis appearance along witb bis wife, Manu respectfully addressed Brabmá.
7-8. Manu, " Y o u are father of all living entities and tbe source of tbeir sustenance.
Please instruct us bow may we sérve you by acting according to our capacity and
tbus get fame in tbis life and a superior destination in next life."
L i n k : Brahmá    was mortified when his previous four sons (Kumáras)        disobeyed his
instruction   (Ref. 3.12.5-6). Now the obedience of Manu was very encouraging             for
Brahmá and thus Brahmá appreciated Manu as an ideál son.
9-13: Brahmá to Sváyambhuva Manu
9-10. All blessings unto you botb (svasti stád). I am pleased witb you because of your
beartfelt surrender (átmanárpitam)        unto me witb no reservation           (nirvyalikena
hrdá).   O bero (vira),     a sane person (apramattaih)     wbo is beyond envy (gata-
matsaraih) adores and accepts tbe instructions of a superior (apacitir gurau) witb
great deligbt (sa-ádaram)     and executes it to bis full capacity (saktyá).
11. Brabmá gave tbree instructions: "(i) Béget children similar to you in quality,
(ii) Rule tbe eartb religiously and (iii) Worship tbe Lord tbrougb sacrifices."
12. By thus protecting the population, (i) you will do the highest service unto me and
(ii) the Lord will be pleased witb you.
13. Why please the Lord? - Tbe endeavors of one wbo doesn't satisfy Lord
Janárdana (form of sacrifice - yajna-lingo) are all useless labor as be certainly
neglects bis own interests.
yesám na tusto bhagaván      yajna-lingo  janárdanah
tesám sramo hy apártháya       yad átmá nádrtah svayam
14-15. Manu replied, " I sball abide by your order. Tbe eartb, wbicb is tbe residence
for all living entities, is now mérged in tbe Garbbodaka ocean. Please retrieve i t . "
Note: There are two Varáha incarnations in two different manvantaras which
Maitreya muni combined in his narration here.
Varáha-avatára             Appeared from      In manvantara     Activity
Sveta-varaha (whitish      Brahmá's nostril   Svayambhuva       to lift the eartb from
like moon) [3.13.16-30]                                         Garbbodaka ocean
Nila-varáha (bluish like   Water              Cáksusa           lifted the earth and
cloud) [3.13.31-33]                                             killed Hiranyáksa
16-30:   PASTIMES OF SVETA-VARÁHA IN SVÁYAMBHUVA MANVANTARA
16-17. Brabmá contemplated on bow to raise tbe eartb up, "Wbile I am creating, tbe
eartb bas been inundated. Wbat can we do? Let tbe Almigbty Lord direct us."
18-19. Tben a small form of Boar, in tbe size of a tbumb, came out from Brahmá's
nostril and within a moment, it grew gigantic in tbe sky as a great elephant.
20-22. Struck witb wonder, Brabmá along witb bis sons started speculating about tbe
Boar, " M y mind is perturbed. Is tbis somé divine being or tbe Supreme Lord Yajna
(manvantara-avatára   of tbe V manvantara or Sváyamhhuva-manvantara)     Himself?"
23-24. T o enliven tbem, tbe Lord, tbe master of sacrifices (yajha-purusa)               tben
roared tumultuously like a great mountain, wbicb ecboed in all directions.
25. Hearing tbe all-auspicious sound (roar) of tbe all-merciful (máyá-maya) Lord, tbe
denizens of Jana, Tapa and Satyalokas cbanted mantras from tbe tbree Vedas.
26. Tbe Lord, personification of Vedas (veda-vitána-mürtir)      understood tbeir
chanting as a praise of His qualities, entered tbe water playing like an elephant
igajendra-lila).
Canto 3 Overview
27. Lord Boar flew in the sky, with His tail slashing and His hard hairs quivering.
His glancé was luminous (like sun and moon). He scattered the clouds with
His hooves and white tusks.
28. Although transcendental, the Lord, imitating the actions of a Boar, searched
after the earth by smell. His tusks were fearful. He glanced over tbe sages wbo
were offering prayers and entered tbe water.
29. Lord Boar dived into tbe ocean; it began to roar and two bigb waves appeared
like its arms as if praying, " O Lord, please protect me and do not cut me in t w o ! "
30. Cleaving tbe water witb His sbarp booves, tbe Lord found tbe limits of tbe
unlimited ocean and saw tbe eartb, and personally lifted it.
31-33:      PASTIMES OF NÍLA-VARÁHA IN CÁKSUSA-MANVANTARÁ
31. Lord Varába appeared splendid witb tbe eartb on His tusks. Tben, witb anger
glowing like tbe Sudarsana cakra, He killed Hiranyáksa like a lion kills an elephant.
Note: Hiranyáksa is the son of Diti, who is the daughter of Daksa who belonged to
the Caksusa-manvantara (6* manvantara). So, this Varáha who killed Hiranyáksa
appeared in the Caksusa-manvantara and is called Nila-varáha.
32. Tbe Lord's cbeeks and tongue were smeared witb tbe demon's blood, just as an
elephant becomes reddisb from digging in reddisb eartb.
33. Understanding tbis bluisb (like tamála tree) Boar, witb tbe eartb on tbe tips of
His tusks, to be tbe Supreme Lord, Brabmá and others offered prayers.
34-45:   PRAYERS BY THE SAGES UNTO LORD VARÁHA
34. A l l glories to tbe unconquerable (ajita) enjoyer of all sacrifices. Your form is
personified Vedas {trayim tanúm), and all oceans submerge in Your bair boles.
35-38: Lord Varáha's body is tbe form of sacrifice           (adhvarátmakam)
Vs.     From Your            Arose the                                                          j
35      Skin                 Vedic hymns (chandárhsi)
Bodily bairs         Kusa grass (barhih)
Eyes                 Ghee (ájyam)
Four legs            Four actions of hota, adhvaryu, udgátá and brahmá (cátur-hotram)
36      Tongue               Sacrificial ladle [srak)
Nostril              Ghee ladle (sruva)
im^mwMMMM^MmmtiimíMjmMjm.
3.13 Appearance Of Lord Varáha
Belly           Idd Vessél
Ears            Camasd container
Mouth           Prásitra vessél
Throat          Soma plates
Chewing         Our sacrifice (agni-hotram)
37    Repeated        Diksd sacrifice (initiation)
appearances
Neck            Upasadah (three desires - relationship, activities and ultimate goal)
Tusks           Prdyaniya (sacrifice after initiation) and udayaniya (final sacrifice
- end of all desires)
Tongue          Pravargyah - prior activities of initiation
Head            Kratu - Satya (fire without sacrifice) and Ávasathyam (fire of
worship)
Living forces   Citayah - aggregáté of all desires
38    Semen           Soma-yajna
Growth          Morning rituals
Seven dhátus    Seven elements of agnistoma sacrifice
Bodily joints   Sátra sacrifices done over twelve days
38. Y o u are the object of all soma and asoma sacrifices and Y o u are bound by tbe
devotion expressed in tbe sacrifice. Miscreants cannot see tbis form of sacrifice (35).
39. Obeisances to Y o u wbo are:
(i) Worshipable by universal prayers and Vedic hymns (akhila-mantra) and
sacrificial ingredients (dravydya)
(ii) Supreme form of all sacrifices (sarva-kratave kriyátmane)                               \
(iii) Realized by one wbo conquered tbe mind by bhakti witb detachment (vairdgya-
bhaktyá       átma-jaya-anubhávita)
(iv) Supreme spiritual master of knowledge in bhakti {jhdnáya   vidyd-gurave).
40-41: With the earth on Your tusks, You appear like
40. A n elephant holding a lotus flower witb its trunk.
41. A buge mountain decorated witb clouds.
42. You and Your wife, tbe eartb in wbom You invested Your own potency (like a
sacrificer puts fire in tbe arani wood) are our father and mother.
43. Wbo else but You could deliver tbe eartb? But it is not very astonishing for Y o u
wbo created tbis wonderful universe witb Your máyá.
Canto 3 Overview
•     'Bmm0Mm0Mmi0Mm
44. We, the inhabitants of tbe pious Jana, Tapas and Satya Iokas, bave also been
purified (pdvitáh) by tbe auspicious drops of water {sivámbu-bindubhir) sprinkled
from tbe sbaking (vidhunvatá) oí Your body made of tbe Vedas (veda-mayam).
45. Your wonderful activities are unlimited (apára-karmanah). Nonsensical people
(bhrasta-matih) consider tbem limited. Please bestow good fortune on conditioned
souls wbo are bewildered by Your powerful máyá.
46-50:    LORD RETURNS TO HIS ABODE AND PHALA-SRUTI
46-47. Tbe Lord tben placed tbe eartb on tbe water and departed for His own abode.
48. Tbe Lord wbo destroys tbe matériái existence of a devotee (hari-medhasa)
becomes very pleased witb one wbo bears (érnvtta) tbis pastime witb devotion
{bhaktyá) and lets others bear [sravayeta) it.
49. No blessing is unobtainable wben tbe Lord is pleased witb someone. Tbe Lord
gives bim His own abode to an unalloyed devotee (ananya-drstyá  bhajatám).
tasmin prasanne sakalásisám prabhau
kim durlabham tábhir alant lavátmabhih
ananya-drstyá bhajatám    guhásayah
svayam vidhatte sva-gatim parah párám
50. Wbo otber tban a non-buman could refuse to bear tbe nectarean topics of tbe
Supreme Lord tbat deliver one from all matériái pangs?
ko náma loke      purusártha-sáravit
purá-kathánárh       bhagavat-kathá-sudhám
áptya karnánjalibhir     bhavápahám
aho virajyeta viná naretaram
MMMMMfáMfmM.MJmM.M
3.14 Pregnancy Of Diti in The Evening
I   3 . 1 4 PREGNANCY O F DITI IN T H E E V E N I N G ^
1-4: Vidura's inquiries        1 am inquisitive to know the cause of fight
about Nila-varáha              between Lord Varáha and Hiranyáksa
5-7: Maitreya               Your inquiries are glorious as the Lord's
congratulates Vidura |                  topics are liberating
10-12: Cupid is torturing me; My co-wives !
8-15: Diti approaches           have children; Our fame will increase I
Kasyapa for unión in           13-15: I chose you before marriage; Why
the evening               should I alone be without a child?; Great
persons shouldn't neglect the distressed
17-18: Source of traivargiki-siddhi; Helps
16-21: Kasyapa                       cross matériái ocean
glorifies his wife         19-21: Takes karma; Helps conquer senses;
Can't be repaid
22: Others will criticize
3.14
Pregnancy                                        23-24: Ghosts and Siva wander
Of Diti In     22-29: Kasyapa's            25-26: Siva sees with 3 eyes; He regards no |
reasons for                            one his relatíve
The Evening     postponing Union
27-29: Intelligent people worship Siva, Fools
disrespect him, even Brahmá follows Siva
30-31: Diti forced. Kasyapa gave in
30-36: Union and
Diti's repentence            32-36: Diti to Kasyapa, "May Lord Siva be
merciful to me and my embryo."
37-41: Your behavior made everything
37-43: Kasyapa's i           inauspicious. Your sons will be demons.
predictions and Diti's íí
requests               42-43: May the wrath of hráhmanas not
my sons
44-51: Kas'yapa       44-45: Because of your repentence, your
speaks ahout Diti's grandson Prahláda     \
46-50: Qualities of Prahláda
Canto 3 Overview
1. Vidura, not being fully satisfied by hearing, begged Maitreya with földed hands, to
continue narrating the transcendental activities of the Lord.
2-3. I have heard that Hiranyáksa was killed by Lord Varába (in 3.13.31). Wbat was
tbe cause of tbeir figbt wbile tbe Lord was lifting tbe eartb?
4. Please describe to tbis faitbful devotee {sraddadhánaya     bhaktáya) tbe details of
Lord's appearance as Varába {brühi taj-janma-vistaram). M y greatly inquisitive mind
{manah pararh kautühalam) is not fully satisfied {na trpyati).
5-7: MAITREYA CONGRATULATES VIDURA
5. Your inquiry about Lord Hari's avatára-kathá      (botb Varába and Nrsimha) is
befitting a devotee {sádhu). Tbe Lord's topics are tbe source of liberation from tbe
cbain of birtb and deatb for tbe bumans.
6. Proof - By bearing tbese topics from Nárada, Dbruva was eniightened and finally
ascended to tbe Lord's abode, piacing bis feet over tbe bead of deatb.
7. Brabmá described tbe history of tbis figbt wben tbe demigods questioned bim.
L i n k : Maitreya now describes the events that lead the demigods to approach   Brahmá.
15: Dm APPROACHED KASYAPA POR UNION
8-9. Diti, daughter of Daksa, afflicted witb lust and desire for a cbild, approached ber
busband Kasyapa in tbe evening, wbile be was sitting in trance after having offered
oblations in tbe sacrificial fire.
10-15:   Diti's Reasons For Union
10. Cupid (lust) is torturing me.
11.1 am distressed seeing tbe opulence of my co-wives wbo bave children.
12. If you give me qualified children, my fame (and your fame) will spread all over.
13. I bave been attracted to you since before marriage (wben my father asked my
preference for a busband).
14. A l l of US tbirteen sisters are equally faitbful to you. Wby should I alone remain
witbout a cbild?
15. A great person shouldn't neglect one wbo approaches bim in distress.
(im0MmMjmm)MBmM0m9^iMm:mi
;^O2v^0'^2^Ö2flíí'^2^^                           ^•''^ Pregnancy Of Diti In The Evening
16-31:   KASYAPA'S RESPONSE TO DITI
16. Kasyapa, not being very strong, only tried to dissuade the poor and talkative Diti
with pacifying words.
17-21:   Kasyapa Glorifies Wife
17. A wife allows the husband to attain dharma, artha and káma.
18. By living witb bis wife and supporting otber ásramás,         one can cross over tbe
matériái ocean.
19. Wife, tbe better balf of busband, sbares in all auspicious activities and
responsibilities, relieving tbe busband from anxiety.
20. Because of tbe wife, a grhastha can conquer senses, wbicb are unconquerable for
tbe otber ásramás.
21. We can never repay you in tbis lifetime or tbe next.
22- 29: Kasyapa's Reasons For Postponing Union
I will satisfy your desire. But please wait for one muhúrta   because,
22. Others will reproacb me.
23- 24. Ghosts and tbeir master Lord Siva move about at tbis inauspicious time.
25. Lord Siva, your brotber-in-law bas tbree eyes and therefore can see us.
26. Siva regards no one as bis relative (be is equal to all). So, don't expect bis favor.
27. Intelligent people worship Siva to destroy ignorance. His character is spotless, be
bas no equal and be is tbe goal of saints. Yet be acts as if a devil to give salvation to
all devotees of tbe Lord.
28. Fools wbo pamper tbeir bodies tbat are eatable by dogs disrespect Lord Siva.
29. Even Brabmá follows Siva wbo is tbe controller of tbe matériái energy. His
devilisb characteristics are simply imitation.
30. Presséd by Cupid, Diti caugbt hold of Kasyapa's clotb.
31. Kasyapa was obliged; bowing to bis fate, be lay witb ber in a secluded place.
32-36:   DITI'S Ü
32. After tbis, Kasyapa batbed and sat to cbant Gáyatrí.
33. Ashamed of ber faulty action, witb ber bead lowered, Diti spoke to Kasyapa.
tmm.MmymMMM.m.m.MMMM.mm
Canto 3 Overview      ^^féM0}¥MMÍÍM^MlB¥MM€ÍÍ}t
34- 36. " M a y Lord Siva not kill my embryo because of my sin. Siva is angry,
yet forgiving. May be, my brotber-in-law (Sati-patih) wbo is merciful to all women,
be pleased witb me."
37-43:   KASYAPA'S PREDICTIONS AND DITI'S REQUEST
35- Diti was trembling, baving understood tbat sbe interrupted ber busband's evening
duties, yet sbe desired ber cbildren's welfare. Kasyapa addressed ber as follows.
36- Everytbing was inauspicious because of your - (i) mind's pollution (aprdyatydd
átmanah),   (ii) defilement of time {dósán mauhürtikád),      (iii) negligence of my
directions {nidesa aticárena) and (iv) apatby towards demigods {devánám     atihelanát).
39-41. You will bave two contemptuous sons wbo will - (i) constantly afflict tbe
tbree worlds, (ii) kill innocent and sinless living entities, (iii) torture women, (iv)
enrage great souls and tbus (v) will be killed by tbe Supreme Lord.
42-43. D i t i requests - " I t is good tbat my sons will be killed by tbe Lord. But may
tbey never be killed by tbe wratb of bráhmana devotees for even tbe inhabitants of
bell do not favor one wbo is condemned by a bráhmana."
IJ4 -50: KASYAPA SPEAKS ABOUT DITI'S WOULD-BE GRANDSON PRAHLÁDA J
44-45. Because of your (i) repentance {soka), (ii) patience {anutápa), (iii) proper
deliberation {pratyavamarsanát),  (iv) unflincbing faitb on tbe Lord {bhagavaty uru-
mánát) and (v) respect for Lord Siva and me {bhave mayy api cádarát), one of your
grandsons will be a great devotee and become equally famous as tbe Lord.
46. Saintly persons will try to emulate bis character.
47. Wbole universe (everyone) will be pleased witb bim, because tbe Lord is satisfied
witb a devotee wbo does not wisb for anytbing beyond H i m .
48. He will be tbe topmost devotee {mahá-bhágavata).      Due to matured devotional
service and transcendental ecstasy, be will enter Vaikuntba.
49. Other glorious qualities of Prahláda - Virtuous {alampatah), qualified {sila-
dharah), reservoir of all good qualities {guna-ákarah),   joyful in others' bappiness
{hrstah para-rddhyá), distressed in others' suffering {vyathitah duhkhitesu), witbout
enemies {abhüta-satruh), destroyer of lamentation of universe {jagatah soka-hartá).
50. He will see tbe Lord botb internally and externally.
51. Hearing tbat ber grandson will be a great devotee and ber sons will be killed by
tbe Lord, Diti was satisfied.
ifi         3.15 Description Of The Kingdom Of God
3 . 1 5 DESCRIPTION O F T H E KINGDOM O F G O D
You are beyond the influence of
1-11: Demigods             time, you know intentions of all,
approached Brahma             you directly appeared from the
and glorified him              Lord, you are source of the
Vedas, Please solve this prohlem.
12-13: Lour Kumaras once went
to the Vaikuntha planets
12-25: Description of         14-22: Vaikuntha - Men, Lord,
Vaikuntha as given           Lorest, Couples, Birds, Plants,
by Brahmá                     Airplanes, Laksmis
23-25: Who can and who cannot
enter Vaikuntha.
3.15
Description O f                                    Kumáras were stopped at
The Kingdom                                    seventh gate hy Jaya and Vijaya
O f God          26-36: Kumáras             - Angry Kumáras cursed them to
cursed Jaya and                enter the matéria! world -
Vijaya                 Doorkeepers asked forgiveness
and requested that they don't
forget the Lord
37-45: The Lord                37-42: Beauty of the Lord
arrived and gave
Dars'ana to the four             43-45: Kumáras became
Kumáras                           devotees
J
Only hy Your mercy we have
46-50: Prayers of           become devotees, Devotees do
Kumáras to the Lord           not consider liberation as Your
real mercy
Canto 3 Overvie
illlll^B 2 í X - ! l f 2 x í : f l ! f x l f - L ^
1-11: DEMIGODS APPROACHED LORD BRAHMÁI
1. Diti held her sons in the womb for 100 years because sbe was worried tbat (i) tbey
would trouble tbe demigods or (ii) tbey would be killed by tbe Lord.
2. By tbe force of Diti's pregnancy, darkness spread in all directions. Tbe demigods
approached Brabmá and asked bim about tbe cause of darkness. Tbey said:
L i n k : From 3.15.3 to 8, the demigods glorified Brahmá                     in various ways,    sometimes
equating him with the Supreme Lord, as he is the Lord's representative.                      In this way,
they enumerated the qualifications of Brahmá to solve the current                      problem.
3. Y o u are beyond tbe influence of time; therefore nothing is unknown to you.
4. Y o u know tbe intentions of everyone in tbe spiritual and matériái worlds.
5. Y o u are tbe originál source of strength and scientific knowledge                     (vijhána-viryáya),
wbo bave accepted a body by tbe Lord's máyá, composed of rajoguna.
6-7. A l l tbe planets exist within you, and all tbe jivas are generated from you. Persons
wbo meditate upon you, by controlling tbe mind and senses attain your mercy and
are not defeated at any time.
8. We offer respects to tbe cbief person wbo contributed tbe Vedas tbat conduct all
tbe jivas, just as a rope controls tamed bulls.
9-10. Therefore, please solve tbis problem of darkness due to Diti's pregnancy.
11. Brabmá replied to tbe devatás, being pleased by tbeir prayer.
L i n k : Brahmá now narrated the story of how the two doorkeepers of Vaikuntha were
cursed by the four Kumáras to enter Diti's womb.
12-25:    DESCRIPTION OF THE KINGDOM OF GOD
12. M y four sons Sanaka, Sanátana, Sanandana and Sanat-kumára, sometimes travel
tbrougbout tbe matériái and spiritual skies witbout any definite desire.
13. Once tbose pure souls went to tbe Vaikuntba, tbe abode of tbe Lord, wbicb is
worsbipped by all (sarva-loka-namaskrtam).
14-25: Characteristics of Vaikuntha and Vaikuntha-vásis
14. Vaikuntha men - look similar to tbe Lord (vaikuntha-mürtayah);                         engaged in His
devotional service (dharmena árádhayan                    harim);       no desires for sense gratification
{animitta-nimittena).
€*0Wf           *t*i       3.15 Description Of The Kingdom Of God
15. V a i k u n t h a Lord - the originál person; understood through Vedic literature
(sabda-gocarah); established in pure sattva; contributes religious progress for tbe
devotees.
16. Vaikuntba Forest - named Naihsreyasa, witb beautiful desire trees tbat bear
flowers and fruits of all seasons, because tbere everything is spiritual and personal.
17. V a i k u n t h a Couples - fly in airplanes, wbile constantly glorifying tbe faultless
Lord. Tbey even deride tbe fragrance of boney laden mádhavi flowers as distraction.
vaimánikáh sa-lalanás caritdni sasvad
gdyanti yatra samala-ksapandni bhartuh
antar-jale     'nuvikasan-madhu-mddhavinárh
gandhena khandita-dhiyo 'py anilarh ksipantah
18. V a i k u n t h a Birds - temporarily stop tbeir own singing to bear tbe bumming
sound of tbe king of bees tbat resemble hari-kathd.
párdvatányabhrta-sdrasa-cakraváka-
dátyüha-hamsa-suka-tittiri-barhinám  yah
koláhalo viramate 'cira-mdtram uccair
bhrhgádhipe hari-kathdm iva gdyamdne
19. V a i k u n t b a Plants - altbougb transcendentally fragrant, tbey greatly respect
Tulasi for ber austerities tbat made ber leaves attain a position in tbe Lord's garland.
manddra-kunda-kurabotpala-campakárria-
punndga-ndga-bakuldmbuja-pdrijátdh
gandhe 'rcite tulasikábharanena    tasya
yasmims tapah sumanaso bahu mdnayanti
20. Vaikuntba Airplanes and men - Airplanes are made of lapis lazuli, emerald and
gold. Men wbo travel in tbem are so absorbed in Krsna tbat even tbe most beautiful
women cannot stimulate passión in tbem.
yat sankulam     hari-paddnati-mdtra-drstair
vaidürya-márakata-hema-mayair        vimánaih
yesám brhat-kati-tatáh    smita-sobhi-mukhyah
krsnátmanárh na raja ádadhur      utsmayádyaih
21. V a i k u n t h a women - as beautiful as Laksmi; sometimes seen sweeping tbe marble
walls to receive tbe Lord's grace.
I   canto 3 Overview     ^f^^MMMMMMM^M^MM
sri rüpini kvanayati  caranáravindarh
lilámbujena hari-sadmani    mukta-dosá
sarhlaksyate sphatika-kudya upeta-hemni
sammárjativa yad-anugrahane 'nya-yatnah
22. While the Laksmis worship the Lord in their own gardens with tulasi leaves,
they see their reflections in the water, that appear more beautiful due to tbe Lord's
kissing.
23. Wbo cannot enter Vaikuntba? - Unfortunate people wbo are not interested in
tbe descriptions of Vaikuntba. Tbey bear unworthy topics tbat bewilder
tbeir intelligence, take away tbeir good fortune and tbrow tbem into bell.
yan na vrajanty agha-bhido     racanánuvdddc
chrnvanti ye 'nya-visaydh kukathá mati-ghnih
yás tu srutá hata-bhagair nrbhir dtta-sárás
tdrhs tán ksipanty asaranesu tamahsu hanta
24. Importance of buman form - Even tbe demigods desire buman birtb in wbicb
one can attain religious trutb and knowledge. A buman wbo does not understand tbe
Supreme Lord and its abode is completely bewildered by Lord's máyá.
25. Wbo can enter Vaikuntba? - Devotees, wbose bodies cbange in ecstasy and wbo
perspire and breatbe beavily due to bearing tbe glories of tbe Lord.
Link 13     26: After describing the various characteristics   of Vaikuntha and its non-
envious residents from 3.15.14-25, Brahmá now continues with the description of the
visit of the four Kumáras to     Vaikuntha.
f//////^^               26-36:   KUMÁRAS CURSE JAYA AND VIJAYA
26. By tbe strength of yoga-máyá, tbe Kumáras reacbed Vaikuntba, wbicb was
illuminated by airplanes piloted by tbe best devotees, and attained tbe bigbest bliss.
27-28. After crossing six gates witbout being mucb astonished, tbe Kumáras reacbed
tbe seventh gate and saw two doorkeepers (Jaya and Vijaya), wbo were of tbe same
age and are well decorated like tbe Lord. But from tbeir arcbed eyebrows,
discontented nostrils and reddisb eyes, tbey appeared somewbat agitated.
29. Tbe Kumáras, wbo bad no idea of "ours" and "tbeirs" (avisamayá), entered tbe
seventh door at tbeir own will, just as tbey bad passed tbe previous doors witbout
asking tbe doorkeepers.
ÍR            Pl íí W0            ÍR.           3.15 Description Of The Kingdom Of God
30. The Kumáras were naked; although the oldest, they looked only five years old
and they were self-realized [viditdtma-tattvdn).      But Jaya and Vijaya, displaying a
nature displeasing to the Lord (bhagavat-pratiküla-stlau),   blocked tbeir way.
31. Tben, tbe Kumáras' eyes turnéd red witb anger (kdmdnujena - anger is tbe
younger brotber of lust), because tbeir desire to see tbe Lord was tbwarted.
32-34: Kumáras' reaction and curse
32. H o w is it tbat you two, altbougb in tbe bigbest position of service to tbe Lord,
bave developed a discordant mentality {visama svbhdvah)} Wbere is tbe possibility of
an enemy coming here? Y o u must be imposters and therefore suspecting others.
33. Tbere is complete barmony in Vaikuntba between tbe residents and tbe Lord.
Wby tben is tbere fear here?
34. Therefore, we consider tbe apt punishment for you wbo see duality in Vaikuntba.
Go to tbe matériái world wbere tbere are tbree enemies (lust, anger and greed).
Note: The Kumáras' act of angrily cursing the doorkeepers of Vaikuntha, who were
the dear devotees of the Lord, is considered vaisnava-aparádha.
35. Understanding tbe terrible curse of tbe brdhmanas tbat cannot be counteracted,
Jaya and Vijaya became fearful and immediately feli at tbe feet of tbe Kumáras.
36. Jaya and Vijaya spoke: "Let your punisbment bear fruit, for our neglecting to
respect sages like you. But we pray tbat due to your compassion at our repentance,
we will not forget tbe Lord under illusion."
Note: Because of the genuine repentance of the doorkeepers, the Kumáras received
mercy of the devotees. Kumáras also repented that they had cursed two devotees and
thus offended the Lord.
iiniiiiii                 ^^^^   ARRIVES AND GIVES DARSANA TO THE KUMÁRAS
37. Understanding tbe situation, tbe Lord arrived tbere along witb Laksmi.
Note: The Lord appeared on the scene when inner humility aroused in the hearts of
both the Kumáras and the doorkeepers due to repentance of offending each other.
Thus the Lord's appearance proved that bhakti attracts Him.
The Lord also wanted to give the Kumáras who were jnánis, an experience of the
bliss of His own svarüpa, Laksmi and also stop further aggravation of the strain     i
between the Kumáras and His doorkeepers.
38. Tbe Kumáras wbo saw tbe Lord only within tbeir hearts earlier, now directly saw
H i m accompanied by His devotees bearing different parapbernalia for worship.
Canto 3 Overview            ^Mfáí^t^éf^Ű^ét'^t^éÍ^^^^
39-41: Description of the Lord's beautiful form
Feature           Description
Face              zAuspicious, pLcasing, mosi acsiraDie, Dicssing everyone
Glancé            1 oucning tne core or nearts
V-íOinpicxion     JJlaGlAlMl
RlíjrlricK
MJlKJtXU. CliCatResidence nf T,alcsmT
Waist             Yellow cloth with a shining girdle
Neck              Fresh garland surrounded by bees, charming necklace and Kaustubha jewel
Hands             One rested on the shoulder of Garuda, Other twirled a lotus
Cheeks            Enhanced the beauty of makara earrings which outshone the lightning
Nose              Prominent
Head              Gem-studded crown
Note: The Kumáras were afraid that the Lord might be angry with them for cursing
His devotees. Jaya and Vijaya were lamenting that they will fali down because of the
brahmanas' curse and thus will no longer see the Lord's sweetness. The Lord pacified
both the parties by His pleasing face and affectionate glancé respectively.
42. Lord's beauty, beiug mauy times maguified by tbe iutelligeuce of H i s devotees,
defeated tbe pride of Laksmi. He is worshipable by all tbe demigods. Kumáras saw
Him witb uusatiated eyes aud joyously bowed tbeir heads at His lotus feet.
43. Wbeu tbe breeze carrying tbe aroma of tulasi leaves from tbe Lord's lotus feet
eutered tbe sages' uostrils, tbey experieuced cbauge botb iu body aud iu miud, eveu
tbougb tbey were attached to tbe impersoual Brabmau uuderstaudiug.
tasyáravinda-nayanasya         padáravinda-
kinjalka-misra-tulasi-makaranda-váyuh
antar-gatah sva-vivarena cakára tesám
sanksobham aksara-jusám api citta-tanvoh
AA. Tbe Kumáras viewed tbe Lord's form agaiu aud agaiu (face - smile - lotus feet)
aud attaiued meditation on the Lord's personal feature.
Note: Although the Kumáras got transformed from the impersonal conception to the
personal conception of the Supreme Lord, tbey attained only sánta-bhakti and not
pure dasya-bhakti because of their offence to Jaya and Vijaya.
45. Tbis pleasing form (nayanábhirámam)        of tbe Lord, wbicb is approved by mauy
autborities, is tbe object of meditation for tbe yogis seekiug liberation.
l^'éVA^éí''&'éí''&'ií'4^É^^                    3.15 Description Of The Kingdom Of God
46. You are uot manifested to the sinful. But by Your appearance uow, we realize tbe
statements beard from our father Brabmá about Your confidential nature.
47. Your trausceudeutal form cau be understood ouly by Your mercy (anutápa-
viditair), tbrougb uufliucbiug devotional service (drdha bhakti-yogair), by great sages
wbo are uot interested iu matériái life (virágdh).
Note: Here the Kumáras say that by the Lord's mercy, they have become devotees,
though they were jnanis earlier.
48. Because tbe surrendered devotees, wbo are expert knowers of mellows (rasa-jitáh)
are immersed iu experiencing tbe taste of beating pure hari-kathd, tbey do uot
consider eveu liberation as Your mercy, wbat to speak of beaveuly bappiness!
nátyantikam viganayanty api te prasádam
kimv anyád arpita-bhayam bhruva unnayais te
ye 'nga tvad-anghri-saraná  bhavatah katháyáh
kirtanya-tirtha-yasasah kusalá rasa-jháh
49. May we be ború iu auy bellisb couditiou, but we pray tbat our - (i) minds are
engaged iu Your service, (ii) words speak about Y o u , aud (iii) ears bear about Y o u .
[Eveu bell witb bhakti is preferable to liberation.]
kámam bhavah sva-vrjinair nirayesu nah stác
ceto 'livad yadi nu te padayo rameta
vácas ca nas tulasivad yadi te 'nghri-sobháh
püryeta te guna-ganair yadi karna-randhrah
50. We offer our respects to Your eterual form tbat cauuot be seen by tbe
unfortunate, but is manifested to us aud tbus satisfied our miud aud vision.
Canto 3 Overvie
| 3 / Í 6 T H E T W O DOORKEEPERS O F VAIKUNTHA,
JAYA A N D VIJAYA, CURSED BY T H E SAGES
2-5: I approve the punishment, ! consider
this an offense by Myself
6-7:1 became glorious because of the
hráhmanas
2-12: The Lord
8-9: I enjoy food through the mouth of
apologizes to             hráhmanas, and i take their dust
the Kumaras
10-11: People who respect brahmanas
please Me, others dont.
12: Let My servants come back to Me
soon
13-15: Situation of [    Couldn't understand the Lord's speech,
Kumáras         P    but delighted that the Lord was happy
16-24: You alone protect the hráhmanas.
3.16 The Two                               You respect them to set an example. You
Doorkeepers        16-25: Kumáras            don't depend on anyone's mercy.
reply to Lord
of Vaikuntha,          Náráyana              25: We cursed two faultless men. We
Jaya and                                 accept whatever You ordain on them or
Vijaya, Cursed                                              on US
by the Sages                              26: Punishment on them is ordained by Mei
27-28: Sages departed from Vaikuntha
26-32: The Lord        29-31 :Tord fo Jaya and Vijaya -Táo not
reconciles situation
desire to nullify hráhmanas' curse. Go to
matériái world. Laksmi foretold this. You
will return to Me by meditating on Me in
anger.
33-35: jaya and Vijaya feli from Vaikuntha
33-37: Lord Brahmá               and entered Diti's womb
concludes the
36-37: The prowess of these twin asuras
narration          disturbed you. Lord will only come to our
rescue
1, After congratulating the sages for their nice words, the Lord spoke as follows.
[Understanding the fear of the Kumáras, the Lord spoke to pacify them.j
2-12: THE LORD APOLOGIZES To THE KUMÁRAS ^^^^jjjjjjj^^
2-3. These attendants of Mine, ignoring Me, have offended you. I approve the
punishment given by you, wbo are devoted to Me.
4. To Me tbe bráhmana        is tbe bigbest and most beloved. Since tbe disrespect was
sbown by M y attendants, I consider tbis an offense by Myself. So I seek forgiveness.
L i n k : 'How can the Supreme Lord commit an offense? Even if You do, who could
punish You?' [Answer: Infamy is the punishment.]
5. Servant's mistake causes master's infamy - A wrong act committed by a servant
leads people to blame bis master, just as a spot of wbite leprosy pollutes entire body.
yan-námáni   ca grhnáti    loko bhrtye    krtágasi
so 'sádhu-vádas    tat-kirtirh   hanti tvacam     ivámayah
L i n k : But how is it that from us, You get fame or infamy? Are we greater than You?
6-11: The Lord glorifies the brahmanas
6. I attained fame because of you - By bearing wbose glories tbe wbole world
including tbe candála     is purified, tbat Lord I am, bave obtained fame as a tirtha
because of you. I will not besitate to lop off M y own arm if it offends you.
7. Because of M y service to devotees like you, tbe dust of M y feet immediately
wipes out all sin. Even Laksmi does not leave Me, altbougb I am not attached to ber,
and others perform vows to obtain ber favor.
8. I enjoy food through the moutb of brábmanas - I do not relish tbe offerings
tbrougb my moutb as tbe sacrificial fire witb tbe same relish as I do tbe delicacies,
overflowing witb gbee, wbicb are offered to tbe mouths of tbe                bráhmanas.
9. If I take tbe dust of bráhmanas    on M y bead, wbo will refuse to do tbe same? - By
taking tbeir dust I am tbe master of unobstructed internál energy and tbe water tbat
wasbed M y feet (Gangá) sanctifies tbe tbree worlds including Lord Siva.
10. People who displease Me - Tbose wbo look upon bráhmanas,                              cows and
defenseless creatures as different from Me are like serpents witb sinful vision, (tbey
will go to bell) and are torn apart by tbe vulture-like messengers of Yamarája.
Canto 3 Overview
11. People who please Me - Those who are gladdened in heart and respect the
bráhmanas,   even if they utter harsh words and look upon them as M y own Self and
pacify them, as a son would appease an angry father.
12. Let them come back soon - M y servants, not knowing tbe mind of tbeir master,
bave committed an offense. I sball therefore deem it a favor if you order tbat,
altbougb reaping tbe fruit of tbeir transgression, tbey may return to Me very soon.
Note: Srila Visvanátha Cakravarti Thákura explained that the Lord was not happy
with the Kumáras' act of cursing the doorkeepers and tbe above statements of the
Lord were ringed with sarcasm and a deep attachment towards Jaya and Vijaya.
13-15:   SITUATION OF THE KUMÁRAS
13. T h e Kumáras were not satisfied by tbe Lord's lovely {usatim) and illuminating
{devim) speecb, wbicb was like a series of Vedic bymns {rsi-kulyám), because tbey
were bitten by tbe serpent of anger.
Note: Because the Kumáras committed vaisnava-aparádha, they could not experience
the sweetness of the Lord's words. Though they sbowed great repentance, the non-
removal of their anger shows the difficulty in removing an offense to the devotee.
14. Kumáras couldn't comprehend the Lord's excellent speech, altbougb tbey
beard attentively and pondered on it, because of its momeutous import {guru artha)
and profound significance   {agádha-gambhirárh).
L i n k : Wondering for a long time whether the Lord favored them or condemned them,
they concluded that the Lord was pleased with them, and thus they rejoiced.
15. T h e Sages were nevertheless delighted and, bairs standing on end {ksubhita-
tvacah), spoke to tbe Lord, wbo revealed His multiglories tbrougb yoga-máyá.
16-25:   KUMÁRAS' REPLY To LORD NÁRÁYANA
L i n k : Though they had concluded that the Lord      was pleased, they again asked
questions in order to hear the Lord's intentions from His mouth.
16. We are unable to know wbat you intend for us to do, for even tbougb you are tbe
Supreme, you speak in our favor as if we bad done something good for you.
17. Y o u respect tbe bráhmanas to set an example for others. Y o u are tbe worshipable
deity, not only to tbe demigods but also to tbe bráhmanas. [So wbat is tbe meaning of
Your saying tbat witbout service to bráhmanas Your foot dust bas no power?]
m.MmMMmMMfmM.MMjM
3.16 Jaya and Vijaya Cursed By The Sages
18. You always protected the eternal dharma {bhakti) by Your multi-manifestations
{tanubhih). Y o u are tbe supreme objective of dharma {dharmasya paramo guhyah)
and Y o u are eternally uncbangeable     {nirvikára).
19. By Your mercy alone, detached yogis cross nescience. H o w can Y o u say tbat you
require tbe mercy of others?
L i n k : You have said that Laksmi does not give You up because You have served the
bráhmanas.   But that is impossible.
20. Laksmi, wbose foot-dust is worn on tbe bead by people desiring wealtb, desires
for a place in tbe abode of tbe king of bees, bovering on tbe tulasi offered at Your
feet. [Conclusion   - No one can be tbe benefactor of tbe Lord; rather everyone is a
servant.]
yarh vai vibhütir upayáty anuvelam anyair
arthárthibhih   sva-sirasá       dhrta-páda-renuh
dhanyárpitánghri-tulasi-nava-dáma-dhámno
lokam madhuvrata-pater iva           káma-yáná
21. You are not attached to Laksmi simply because sbe is Your wife (rather by ber
service as a devotee), but attached to tbe activities of Your pure devotees. H o w can
You be purified by tbe dust of tbe patb traversed by tbe          bráhmanas}
22. Protector of bráhmanas - Y o u protect tbis universe by Your appearance in tbree
yugas. Kindly destroy rajas and tamás by sattva to benefit bráhmanas           and demigods.
23. Setting Example - If Y o u do not protect tbe bráhmanas          by offering worship and
mild words, tben tbe auspicious patb of worship will be rejected by people in generál,
since tbey accept Y o u as pramána.    [Your saying tbat Y o u take tbe dust of     bráhmanas
is for teacbing tbe people].
24. Y o u , tbe ocean of sattva {sattva-nidhi),     never want tbe auspicious patb to be
destroyed. Y o u are tbe Lord of tbe tbree worlds {tri-adhipateh) and tbe maintainer of
tbe universe {visva-bhartuh),     therefore Y o u r potency is not reduced by Y o u r
submissive behavior, rather it is Your transcendental pastime.
25. We understand tbat we bave cursed two fauitless persons. We accept witbout
duplicity {nirvyalikam),    wbatever punisbment or reward Y o u ordain on tbese
innocent persons or also upon us.
í.MMMM.MmM.m
Canto 3 Overvie^
26-32:   THE LORD RECONCILES THE SITUATIONÍ
26. The Lord replied: The punishment on them, as becoming demons, was ordained
by Me. But tbey will sbortly return to Me as tbey will be absorbed in meditation on
Me in anger             {samrambha-sambhrta-samádhy-anubaddha-yogau).
Note: Nothing can happen without the Lord's sanction. The Lord's plan was behind
this curse. Because the Lord is the source of everything, anger and fighting spirit also
exist in Him. But in Vaikuntha, the Lord has no enemies to fight with, because
everyone is engaged in His service. So the Lord comes to the matéria) world along
with His devotees (in this case Jaya and Vijaya) who temporarily act as His enemies
to fuifill their beloved Lord's fighting desires.
Furthermore, while fulfilling His desires, the Lord instructed the sádhakas through
this episode - to be careful not to commit offenses.
27-28. Having seen tbe object of bliss for tbeir eyes (nayandnanda-bhdjanam),                 tbe
Vaikuntba and tbe self-illuminating Lord of Vaikuntba, tbe sages circumambulated
tbe Lord. Taking His permission, tbey departed.
2 9 - 3 1 : The Lord spoke to Jaya and Vijaya
29. Go to tbe matériái world, but do not fear. Tbougb I can nullify a                  bráhmana's
curse, I do not desire to go against M y own rules.
30. Tbis departure was foretold by L a k s m i . Sbe was very angry wben you stopped
ber from entering tbe gate, wben I was sleeping.
31. By meditating on Me in anger (sarhrambha-yogena),               you will overcome tbe
offense to bráhmanas     and return to Me sbortly. [Tbougb you will bave tbe mentality
of demons, you will tbink of Me and sérve Me. I will experience pure bappiness in
vira-rasa fighting witb you two wben I descend as tbree different         avatáras.]
32. After tbus speaking at tbe door of V a i k u n t b a , tbe Lord returned to His abode,
wbere tbere are many celestial planes and all-surpassing wealtb and splendor.
Note: The Kumáras did not enter Vaikuntha. Although sometimes brdhmanas and
yogís go to Vaikuntha, they were not meant to stay there; they come back.
-ÍM             33-3^7;'-p'^P ^'^'^"^ ^Q^^'-MP^s THE NAÍMIIQI^
33. Jaya and Vijaya lost their luster due to brahma-sápa   and feli from Vaikuntha.
34. As they were falling, a great roar of disappointment arose from all the demigods.
35. These two entered the womb of Diti tbrougb tbe semen of Kasyapa Muni.
36. It is tbe prowess of tbese twin asuras tbat bas disturbed you. Tbere is no remedy
within my power, however, it is tbe Lord Himself wbo desires to do all tbis.
L i n k : The demigods ask Brahmá,   "When will the Lord mitigate this   situation?"
yj. Tbe Lord alone will come to our rescue. He is - (i) tbe controller of tbree modes
(tri-adhisah), (ii) responsible for tbe creation, preservation and dissolution of tbe
universe (visvasya yah sthiti-layodbhava-hetur), (iii) tbe most ancient person (ádyah),
(iv) His yoga-máyá cannot be easily understood by tbe masters of yoga (yogesvarair
api duratyaya-yogamáyah).     Wbat is tbe use of deliberating on tbis?
Canto 3 Overview                               0Wií mi
r   3 . 1 7 - 1 9 LORD VARÁHA A N D HIRANYÁKSA
1-15: Inauspicious omens
after the birth of the twin
brothers
3.17 Victory Of     15-19: The brothers grow upl
Hiranyáksa Over All
The Directions Of    20-26: Hiranyaksa conquers!
The Universe              all directions
27-31: Conversation
between Varuna and
Hiranyáksa
2-8: Démon criticizing Lord
Varáha
9-12: Lord's fitting Reply to |
3.17-19 Pastimes i     3.18 The Battle             Hiranyáksa            !
of Lord Varáha      between Lord Boar
and the démon        13-20: Light between Lord
Hiranyáksa          Varáha and Hiranyáksa
20-28: Brahmá requests
Lord Varáha to Kill
Hiranyáksa
1-29: Light between
Hiranyáksa and Varáhadeva I
27-32: Brahmá and others i
3.19 The Killing of       praised Hiranyáksa    |
Démon Hiranyáksa        33-36: Glories of Lord's
activities
37-38: Phala-Sruti
í M
r^-[3-'.v^9fK3KX*i^3^^**\3*~véft.,
3.17 Victory Of Hiranyáksa
3 . 1 7 VICTORY O F HIRANYÁKSA O V E R
ALL T H E DIRECTIONS O F T H E UNIVERSE
1. After hearing from Brahmá, all the demigods gave up fear and returned to their
respective places.
2. Diti had been apprehensive of the trouble to the demigods from her children, so
she gave birth to the twins only after a hundred years.
3. After their birth, many fearful natural disturbances started to occur on the earth,
the heavens and the outer space.
fmmmmmmmmmmmm,                           he demons' birth
4    Mountains and the earth shook
Fire everywhere
Thunderbolts and meteors feli
Many inauspicious planets appeared along with comets
Harsh winds blew, with dust as their flags, storms as their armies and uprooted
gigantic trees
6    Dense clouds covered all the luminaries in the sky spreading darkness
Ocean, along with the inhabitants, wailed loudly
Rivers and lakes with withered lotuses were agitated
8    Eclipses of the sun and the moon with balos
Thunder without clouds
Sounds of chariots from mountain caves
9    She-jackals vomiting fire yelied inauspiciously along with the cries of jackals, owls
10   Dogs cried like singing and weeping
11   Asses ran in herds, striking the earth with their hooves and wildly braying
12      Frightened by the        birds flew from their nests
braying of the asses...   ^^ows passed urine and stool
mMmí0Mm0Mim0miMm:tiM0M:0m
Canto 3 Overview
13     Frightened cows yielded blood instead of milk
Clouds rained pus
Image of the gods in the temples shed tears
Trees feli down without a blast of wind
14     Inauspicious planets (Mars, Saturn etc.) with retrograde motion surpassed the
auspicious ones (Mercury, Jupiter, Venus etc.) and came in conflict with one another
15. Seeing these evil omens, everyone except the four Kumaras, are afraid and
thought that the time for the dissolution was at hand.
15-19: THE     BROTHERS GREW UP
16. The two brothers began to grow like mountains with bodies as strong as steel.
17. With their gigantic forms they seemed to kiss the sky with their crowns and each
of their steps shook the earth, surpassed the sun with their belted waists.
18. Kasyapa gave them names - the first-born son was named Hiranyáksa, and the
first-conceived (born later) son was named Hiranyakasipu.
19. Fearless Hiranyakasipu having received a benediction from Brahmá started to
control all the three worlds.
J0-26iHiRANY^                          ALL DIRECTIONS
20. Hiranyáksa traveled all over the universe with a fighting spirit just to satisfy his
elder brother Hiranyakasipu.
21-22. Seeing his uncontrollable temper, gigantic form with golden anklets, garland
and huge mace, his mentái and bodily strength and the boon he received, all the
demigods got frightened and fled.
23. Seeing that the devatás had disappeared because of his strength, he roared loudly.
24. After returning from heaven, with a desire to sport, he dove into the ocean.
25. The aquatics that förmed the host of Varuna ran away with fear.
26. Moving about in the ocean for many years striking the waves with his mace, he
reacbed Vibhávari, the capital of Varuna.
•ír^ÖMÍÍ'Sl^fí'SíU^^^                     3.18 Battle Between The Lord And Hiranyáksa
27-31:   CONVERSATION BETWEEN VARUNA AND HIRANYÁKSA
27-28. There Hiranyáksa feli at Varuna's feet like a lowborn man, and to make fun
of him, he said, "Give me battle, O Supreme Lord! You are the guardian of an entire
sphere, a great ruler, a great warrior, and having conquered all the daityas and
dánavas, you once performed a Rájasüya sacrifice."
29. Thus provoked, Varuna controlled his anger using his intelligence and replied,
"We have now desisted from fighting, having grown too old for combat."
30-31. "Only Lord Visnu can satisfy your desire to fight. Lven heroes like you praise
His prowess. On reaching H i m you will be rid of your pride and will lie down on the
field of battle, surrounded by dogs, for eternal sleep. He assumes incarnations like
Varáha to exterminate wicked fellows like you and to show grace to the virtuous."
3 . 1 8 T H E BATTLE BETWEEN LORD BOAR ^
A N D T H E D É M O N HIRANYÁKSA
1. Proud Hiranyaksa neglected Varuna's warnings, and learning from Narada muni
the whereabouts of the Lord, he quickly entered the Garbbodaka ocean (rasátalam).
l                   2-8: HIRANYÁKSA CRITICIZED LORD VARÁHA
2. There, Hiranyáksa saw the all-powerful Lord, bearing the earth on His tusks,
robbing his splendor. Démon laughed, " O h , amphibious beast (vana-gocaro mrgah)\"
3. "This earth is entrusted to us, the inhabitants of lower regions. You cannot take it
and not be hurt by me. O lowest of the devatás, who have taken the form of a boar!"
Indirect glorification: You have been given the earth by Brahmá.     Do not give up the
earth. You will obtain our kingdoms along with the earth by being merciful to me.      O
supreme among the devatás, who have appeared as a boar for Your devoteesl
4. "Rascal! Nourished by our enemies, Y o u have killed demons by remaining
invisible. O fool, Your power is only mystic; today I will enliven my kinsmen by
killing Y o u . "
Indirect glorification: Have the devatás taken shelter of you, who kill asuras by your
mercy (máyayá) in order to award me liberation? By killing the demons you give them
a spiritual destination. You remain victorious though you are        invisible.
5. "When Y o u will die by my mace all the demigods and sages will also die, like trees
without roots."
Indirect glorification: When the démon would be deprived of his mace by the Lord,
not only the neophyte devotees but also the ancient sagacious devotees of the              Lord
would be very much satisfied.
Demon's criticism & meaning       Demon's indirect praise as given by acaryas
vana-         Resident of the     Náráyana, who lies on the water
gocarah       forest or water
mrgah          Animál             One who is sought after by great sages
ajiia           Fool              There is no knowledge which is unknown to You
surádhama       Lowest of the     Lord of all the demigods; therefore He is the best of all
demigods          demigods, or God
mameksatah      In my presence    In spite of my presence, You are able to take away earth
na svasti       You cannot go     Unless You kindly take this earth from our custody,
yásyasi         and not be hurt   there can be no good fortune for us
by me.
abhaváya        For killing       Killing the process of continued birth and death
sucah           Grief             Matériái miseries are extinguished by Lord's yogamáyd
6. Although the Lord was pained by the shaft like abusive words of the démon, by
seeing that the earth placed on the ends of His tusks was frightened. He bore the pain
and rose out of the water.
Note: Lord is satisfied if someone offers a nice prayer, and similarly. He is
dissatisfied if someone decries His existence or calls Him ill names. God is as
sentient as we are.
7. The démon, with golden hair and fearful tusks, gave a chase to the Lord and said,
"There is nothing reproachable for shameless creatures!"
MMmmm.                           a   '*A1   3.18 Battle Between The Lord And Hiranyaksa
Indirect glorification: Can there be criticism of those who are merciful and modest?
Or the démon criticized    himself, "Is there censure for me, a démon,    dedicated to my
own pleasure, devoid of shame?"
8. The Lord placed the earth on the surface of the water and gave her the ability to
float on water. Brahmá extoUed the Lord and the demigods rained flowers on H i m .
9-12:   THE LORD'S FITTING REPLY TG HiRANYÁKsy^||||||||||||^^
8. The Lord angrily replied Hiranyáksa with sharp words and laughed.
Note: The Lord was angry upon hearing the abusive words of démon, and
laughed on hearing the other meaning of the words, which were praise. Thus the
Lord's fitting reply to Hiranyáksa also has two meanings.
10. "Indeed, We are jungle creatures, and searching for dogs like you. One who is
beyond death has no fear from the loose talk of one who is bound by laws of death."
Another Meaning: We are seen by the pure devotees (vana-gocarah).             Mercifully,    I
search out sense enjoyers (grdma-sirhhán)    to deliver them, since one who receives My
mercy is not subject to death.
11. "Certainly We have stolen the charge of the inhabitants of Rasátala. I will stay
here because, having created enmity with a powerful enemy, I have no place to go."
Another Meaning: / am the receiver of the devotional offerings even by the demons
(rasaukasdm).    I must battle with you to derive bliss from fighting because of the
enmity in you caused by the curse of Kumáras.     Where else should I go?
12. "Give up all your foolish talk and wipe out the tears of your relatives hy slaying
Us. One does not deserve a seat in an assembly if he fails to fuifill his promise."
Another Meaning: Füled with premá,           you accepted the mood of a démon             as a
promise to give Me the happiness of fighting. He who does not keep promise is unfit to
sit in the assembly. Therefore make Me happy by fighting. Wipe your tears of bliss.
13. Being thus challenged, the démon became angry like a cobra.
14. He quickly sprang upon the Lord and dealt H i m a blow with his powerful mace.
15. The Lord dodged the attack of him, just as an accomplished yogi avoids death.
16. The angry Lord now rushed to meet the démon, who took up his mace again.
wmmWMW^MWíMMMmiMmwmi
Canto 3 Ovei
^^^Í0M0M0M0M0MÍM0MM
17. Then with His mace the Lord struck the enemy on the right of his brow, but the
démon protected himself by his own mace.
18. In this way, they struck each other with their huge maccs with a desire to win.
19. They hoth had sustained injuries on their bodies from the blows of each other's
pointed maccs. In their eagerness to win, they performed various maneuvers, like two
forceful bulls fighting for the sake of a cow.
20-28: B   R^^^^^5f^5fo^^5SHAl^^lLFIBS!H
20. Brahma, accompanied by the sages, came to see the terrible fight between them.
21. After seeing the unprecedented power of Hiranyáksa that no one could fight with
him, Brahmá then addressed Náráyana, who assumed the form of a Boar.
22-23. "This démon is an offender of - devatás, devotees, bráhmanas, cows and
sinless living beings. Having attained a boon from me, he wanders all over the
universe, searching for a proper combatant.
24. M y dear Lord, there is no need to play with this serpentine and wicked démon.
25. Before his demonic hour arrives and his cruel power increases, kill him.
26. The darkest evening, which covers the world, is fast approaching. So kindly kill
him and win victory for the demigods.
27-28. The auspicious period known as abhijit, commenced at midday and has almost
passed. Luckily, now this démon has come of his own accord to Y o u . So kill him and
establish the worlds in peace.
3 . 1 9 T H E KILLING O F D É M O N HIRANYÁKSA |
1. Hearing the words of Brahmá, which were free from all sinful purposes
{nirvyalika) and were like nectar, the Lord laughed and accepted his prayer with love.
mim:mMMMM0MMM0M!iM:tiM0M0jm
3.19 The Killing of Démon Hiranyaksa
t^!aíl!l?2;l?-Il^t^!cfJ*^^                          —*
2-6: Hiranyáksa overthrew the Lord's mace
2. T h e L o r d sprang and aimed H i s mace at the chin of Hiranyáksa.
3. But the démon struck back w i t h his mace and the L o r d ' s mace slipped f r o m H i s
hand and feli d o w n w h i r l i n g . T h i s w a s miraculous.
4. T h o u g h the démon had the opportunity, he did not strike the unarmed L o r d ,
respecting the l a w of single combat. T h i s made the L o r d angry.
5. A s the L o r d ' s mace feli, a cry of a l a r m arose f r o m the witnessing gods and rsis.
T h e L o r d acknowledged the demon's dharma                  and i n v o k e d H i s Sudarsana cakra.
6. A s the L o r d engaged i n play w i t h the démon, the witnessing people, w h o had no
knowledge of the L o r d ' s reality, c r i e d , " M a y v i c t o r y attend Y o u ! Please k i l l h i m . "
7-12: The Lord overthrew Híranyáksa's mace
7.   Seeing the L o r d w i t h        H i s cakra,     the demon's senses were overpowered by
indignation, began to hiss like a serpent and bit his lip.
8. Hiranyáksa stared at the L o r d as though to b u r n H i m . H e sprang into the air and
aimed his mace at the L o r d , e x c l a i m i n g , " Y o u are s l a i n ! "
9. T h e L o r d effortlessly k n o c k e d d o w n the mace, w h i c h had the speed of the w i n d ,
w i t h H i s left foot.
10. T h e L o r d then said, " T a k e up your weapon and t r y again, eager as y o u are to
conquer m e . " T h e démon again attacked the L o r d by his mace and roared loudly.
11. T h e L o r d playfuUy caught hold of that mace just as G a r u d a w o u l d seize a serpent.
12. H i s valor thus frustrated, Hiranyáksa felt humiliated and reluctant to take back
the mace w h e n it w a s offered by the L o r d .
13-16: Faílure of Híranyáksa's various attacks
13. Hiranyáksa then invoked a deadly trident and t h r e w it at the L o r d , as one w o u l d
use penance to h a r m a holy             bráhmana.
14. T h e L o r d cut that trident w i t h H i s cakra even as I n d r a cut off a w i n g of G a r u d a .
15. Hiranyáksa, angered, struck the L o r d ' s chest w i t h his h a r d fist and disappeared.
16. But the L o r d did not feel the least q u a k i n g , like an elephant struck by a garland.
17-22: lllusions created by Hiranyáksa
17. Hiranyáksa then employed m a n y illusions against the L o r d of yogamdyd                               (yoga-
máyesvare).      Seeing this, the terrified people thought that the dissolution w a s near.
18. Fierce w i n d s began to b l o w ; stones, as if t h r o w n by machine guns, started falling.
Canto 3 Overyii
19. T h e sky hecame devoid of luminaries due to the clouds, w h i c h were accompanied
by lightning and thunder. I t started raining pus, hair, blood, stool, urine and bones.
20.   M o u n t a i n s discharged various weapons and naked demonesses             armed        with
tridents appeared w i t h their hair hanging loose.
21. R u f f i a n Y a k s a s and Raksasas started shouting cruel and violent slogans.
22. T h e n the L o r d invoked cakra w h i c h w a s capahle of destroying those illusions.
23-26: Death of Hiranyáksa
23.   A t that time, a shudder suddenly t a n through the heart of D i t i and                    she
rememhered her husband's prediction. Blood started to f l o w f r o m her breasts.
24. W i t h his illusions being destroyed, Hiranyáksa tried to squeeze the L o r d ' s hody
w i t h his arms. B u t to his amazement he f o u n d the L o r d standing outside his grasp.
25. Frustrated Hiranyáksa started to strike the L o r d ' s chest w i t h his h a r d fists, but
the L o r d then slapped h i m i n the r o o t of the ear.
26. T h o u g h struck indifferently, Hiranyáksa's hody began to w h e e l , eyeballs bulged
out, arms and legs broken, hair scattered and he feli d o w n dead like an uprooted tree.
27-32: BRAHMA A N D OTHERS PRAISED HIRANYÁKSA
27. Seeing the dead hody of H i r a n y a k s a , whose glow w a s yet unfaded, B r a h m a and
others admiringly said: " O h , w h o could meet such a blessed d e a t h ? "
28. " H e w a s struck by a forefoot of the L o r d , on w h o m yogis meditate upon. W h i l e
seeing the face of the L o r d he cast off his h o d y . "
29. " T h e s e t w o assistants of the L o r d , having been cursed, became demons and w i l l
get back to their positions after a f e w b i r t h s . "
30. D e m i g o d s addressed the L o r d : A l l obeisances unto Y o u ! Y o u are the enjoyer of
all sacrifices {akhila-yajna-tantave),         w h o have assumed the f o r m of Boar i n pure
sattva   for maintaining the w o r l d {sthitau      grhitámala-sattva-mürtaye).   N o w that the
démon has been slain by Y o u , w e are n o w at ease, i n devotion to Y o u r lotus feet.
31.   M a i t r e y a : T h e n the L o r d returned to H i s abode, where there is a l w a y s an
uninterrupted festival (akhanditotsavam),           being praised by all the demigods.
32.1 have spoken to y o u the pastime of Varáhadeva as I heard it f r o m m y            guru.
5^ft .'S?Mt)í':S^^^^^                                                   5- •> 9 The Killing of Démon Hiranyáksa
33-36: GLORIES O E T H E LORD'S ACTIVITIES
Srila Süta G o s v á m i to Saunakádi R s i s :
33.   V i d u r a felt transcendental            bliss by hearing of the L o r d ' s pastimes f r o m the
authoritative source of Kausárava [ M a i t r e y a ] , and became very m u c h pleased.
34.    What       to   speak      of    hearing       the     pastimes      of    the    Lord,    people     may   take
transcendental pleasure even i n hearing of the virorks and deeds of the devotees.
anyesdth     punya-slokandm               udddma-yasasdm            satdm
upasrutya       bhaven modah            srivatsdnkasya         kim   punah
35. T h e L o r d delivered G a j e n d r a (even an animál) w h o meditated upon the L o r d ' s
lotus feet, w h e n attacked by an alligátor.
36. W h a t grateful person w o u l d not w o r s h i p the L o r d , w h o can be easily pleased by
the spotless devotees w h o take exclusive shelter of H i m ? H o w e v e r the unrighteous
m a n finds it d i f f i c u l t to w o r s h i p H i m .
tam sukhdrddhyam              rjubhir      ananya-saranair           nrbhih
krtajnah      ko na seveta        durdrddhyam           asddhubhih
"^'7-38?PHAÍlTS-ff'
37. A n y o n e w h o hears, chants, or takes pleasure in this n a r r a t i o n w i l l be relieved
f r o m sinful results, even f r o m the sin of k i l l i n g a             brdhmana.
38.   I t confers -        e x t r a o r d i n a r y merit (mahd-punyam),           w e a l t h (dhanyam),    position
ipadam),       fame (yasasyam),            long life {dyur),          prowess of senses and life air during
battle. One w h o listens it at the last moment is transferred to the abode of the L o r d .
etan mahd-punyam              alam     pavitram
dhanyam        yasasyam        padam       dyur-dsisdm
prdnendriydndm              yudhi      saurya-vardhanam
ndrdyano       'nte gatir anga        srnvatdm
Canto 3 Overview
f7-
3 . 2 0 CONVERSATION BETWEEN MAITREYA A N D VIDURA
áaunaka Rsi asked about Svayambhuva
Manu's further activities
1-8: Saunaka Rsi':
Questions             Glorified Vidura and Hari-kathá, and
inquired about Vidura's further inquiries to
Maitreya
9-11: Vidura asked
How did Brahma and his prajapati sons
about Brahmá's
create further progeny?
creation
Pradhana —» Mahat-tattva —» Falsé Ego -
12-15: Maitreya
23 elements —* joined by Lord's cohesive
3.20            summarized primary
creation (Sárga)      energy to form universal egg. Then the
Conversation                                         Lord entered into it.
between                                   19-21: Creation of Yaksas and Raksasas
Maitreya and
22: Creation of Devatas
Vidura
23-29: Creation of Demons
30-37: Demons flirting with twilight
assuming it to be a woman
38-39: Creation of Gandharvas and
Apsarás
16-53: Brahmá's
creation (Visarga or     40-41: Creation of Bhútas and Pis'ácas
Secondary creation)
42-43: Creation of Sadhyas and Pitás
44: Creation of Siddhas and Vidyádharas
45-46: Creation of Kinnaras and
Kimpurusas
47-48: Creation of Snakes
49-51: Creation of Manu and others
52-53: Creation of the Sages
SHÍÍ'          ^AIMÍÍ    'tAÍ^fí''Í?*íi' *A1          'T^0 Conversation Between Maitreya And Vidura
Note: The secondary creation previously described in detail (3.12) is again described
partially in this chapter, in order to relate the lineage of Sváyambhuva Manu.
Illlllll^                                               R s i ' s QUESTIONS
I . S a u n a k a R s i - A f t e r the earth w a s situated i n its orbit, w h a t did Sváyambhuva
M a n u do to show the path of liberation for the living entities?
2-4.   V i d u r a is -    (i) a great devotee, (ii) f r i e n d of L o r d K r s n a , (iii) gave up the
company of his elder brother as he w a s offender to K r s n a , (iv) son of Vedavyása, (v)
accepted the lotus feet of K r s n a , (vi) w a s attached to K r s n a ' s devotees, (vii) purified
by visiting tirthas,        met M a i t r e y a i n H a r d w a r . W h a t more did he inquire f r o m
Maitreya?
5. T h e r e must have been hari-kathá,         w h i c h destroys sin like the Ganges.
6. Please narrate a l l about that, w h i c h are a l l magnanimous. W h a t relisher of rasa
can be satiated by hearing the nectarean pastimes of the L o r d ?
7-8.   Süta G o s v á m i     r e s p o n d e d , " V i d u r a w a s delighted to hear the pastimes of
Varáhadeva. V i d u r a then enquired f r o m M a i t r e y a as f o l l o w s . "
9-11:     VIDURA'S INQUIRIES A B O U T BRAHMÁ'S CREATION
9. O holy sage, w h o k n o w the matters inconceivable to us {avyakta-márga-vit),                   what
did Brahmá do to create living beings after evolving the Prajápatis?
10.    H o w did the        Prajápatis    (such as M a r í c i     and Sváyambhuva          Manu)    create
according to the order of Brahmá, and h o w did they evolve this manifested universe?
I I . D i d the Prajápatis create i n conjunction w i t h their respective w i v e s , did they
remain independent i n their action, or did they a l l jointly produce it?
12-15. Maitreya summarizes Primary creation (Sárga: kárana and kárya srstis)
L i n k : In answer   to the question     about secondary        creation   in verse 9, primary     creation
is described    in summary       for completing     the     narration.
12.    W h e n the e q u i l i b r i u m of the three modes         (pradhana)       w a s agitated by the
inexplicable k a r m a s of the jivas (daivena          durvitarkyena),     by Mahá-visnu (parena),      by
time (animisena),         the mahat-tattva     arose.
13. Mahat-tattva          —>• ahankdra    —>• the five gross elements, the five tan-mdtras,            the five
action senses, five knowledge-senses and their controlling devatás.
Canto 3 Overview
14. These elements, w h i c h were unable to produce the creation separately, combined
w i t h the help of the L o r d ' s cohesive energy and produced a shining egg.
15. F o r over one thousand years the shiny egg lay on the w a t e r s of the C a u s a l O c e a n
in a lifeless state. T h e n the L o r d entered it as Garbhodakasáyi V i s n u .
Note: The above description of creation is also found in SB 2.5 and SB 3.5-6.
16. F r o m the navel of Garbhodakasáyi V i s n u sprouted the universal lotus, reservoir
of a l l conditioned souls, and on top of w h i c h Brahmá appeared.
17. Brahmá, as directed by V i s n u , began to create the universe as it w a s before.
18. Brahmá, f r o m his shadow, first created the five types of ignorance -                      támisra,
andha-tátnisra,    tamás,   moha and mahá-moha.          (Refer 3.12.2 for more details)
19-21: Creation of Yaksas and Raksasas
19. O u t of disgust, Brahmá gave up the hody (mentality) of ignorance. I t turnéd into
night, w h i c h produces hunger and thirst, and the Y a k s a s and Ráksasas accepted it.
20. Pained by hunger and thirst, they r a n after Brahmá to eat h i m .
21. Frightened, Brahmá requested them to spare h i m , saying that they were his sons.
22. Devatás - Shining w i t h effulgence, Brahmá then created the devatás situated in
goodness. T h e y accepted the effulgence w h i c h Brahmá gave up, w h i c h became the
day.
23-37: Creation of Demons
23. Brahmá created the demons f r o m his buttocks and they approached h i m for sex.
24. Brahmá first laughed at this, but seeing their shamelessness he grew angry and
flew out of fear.
25. Brahmá took shelter of the L o r d , w h o dispels the agony of surrendered devotees.
26.    B r a h m á - M y L o r d , please protect me f r o m these sinful demons, w h o were
created by me under Y o u r order. T h e y are chasing me for sex.
27. M y L o r d , Y o u are the only one capahle of ending the a f f l i c t i o n of the distressed
and inflicting agony on those w h o never resort to Y o u r feet.
tvam ekah kila lokdndm          klistdndm      klesa-ndsanah
tvam ekah klesadas tesdm          andsanna-paddm        tava
28. L o r d s a i d : " C a s t off this impure hody of y o u r s . " T h u s , Brahmá cast off his hody.
v^^öj^^A' íS^lb'SCA' ^ ^ S Í Í S L ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ' ' ^ ^ ^ ' ^                               Maitreya And Vidura
29-31. T h a t hody became the evening t w i l i g h t . T h e asuras, being passionate, took it
for a beautiful damsel w i t h a l l nice decorations, a n d they got infatuated w i t h a n
appetite for sex.
32-37: Demons describe the twilight giri
32. O h , w h a t a beauty! W h a t self-control! W h a t a budding y o u t h ! W e a l l desire her
but she moves among us as i f detached.
33. Indulging i n various speculations, t h i n k i n g the twilight to be a w o m a n , the
w i c k e d - m i n d e d asuras treated her w i t h respect a n d spoke to her as f o l l o w s .
34. W h o are y o u , O pretty girl? W h o s e daughter are y o u , a n d w h y are y o u here?
W h y do y o u tantalize us, unfortunate as w e are, w i t h the priceless beauty?
35-36. Whosoever y o u m a y be, w e are fortunate to see y o u . W h i l e playing w i t h a
ball, y o u have agitated the minds of a l l onlookers, w i t h your moving bodily beauty.
37. I n this w a y the foolish asuras took the evening twilight to be a beautiful w o m a n
and they accepted the twilight.
38-39: Creation of Gandharvas and Apsarás
38. Brahmá then created the G a n d h a r v a s a n d Apsarás by his beauty w h i c h he h a d
relished.
39. Brahmá then gave up that hody w h i c h became moonlight, a n d the G a n d h a r v a s
headed by Visvávasu accepted i t .
40-41: Creation of Bhütas and Pisácas
40. Brahmá created the Bhütas a n d Pisácas f r o m his laziness, but he closed his eyes
w h e n he s a w them stand naked w i t h their hair scattered.
41. T h e Bhütas a n d Pisácas accepted the hody t h r o w n o f f by Brahmá i n the f o r m of
y a w n i n g . T h i s is also k n o w n as the sleep w h i c h causes drooling. T h e y attack m e n
w h o are impure, a n d their attack is called insanity              (unmadam).
42-43: Creation of Sádhyas and Pitás
42. Brahmá, t h i n k i n g himself p o w e r f u l , created the Sádhyas a n d f r o m his invisibility,
he created the Pitás.
43. T h e Pitás took possession of the invisible body of Brahmá. T h r o u g h this médium
of this invisible body, the wise offer oblations to the Sádhyas a n d Pitás.
44: Creation of Siddhas and Vidyádharas
44. Brahmá created the Siddhas a n d Vidyádharas f r o m his ahility to be hidden f r o m
vision. H e then gave up that f o r m called Antardhána a n d they accepted i t .
••cr51.v;_^.   S^J^MVcíf-v_Canto 3 Overvic-w       ^•JfTiriJIlí'ItJ^^^^
Note: These living creatures can be perceived to be present, but they cannot be seen
by vision.
45-46. Creation of Kinnaras and Kimpurusas
45. Brahmá, beheld his o w n reflection, and a d m i r i n g himself, he created the K i n n a r a s
and K i m p u r u s a s out of that reflection.
46. T h e y accepted the body of reflection cast off by Brahmá. T h a t is w h y they sing
his praises i n the d a w n .
47-48: Creation of Snakes
47. N o t satisfied w i t h the pace of progress of creation, Brahmá l a y d o w n i n a sulién
mood and gave up that body.
48. F r o m that body and its hairs arose the snakes, serpents and m a n y hooded Nágas.
49-51: Creation of Manu and others
49. Brahmá, t h i n k i n g himself successful, created, f r o m his m i n d the M a n u s .
50. Brahmá gave to M a n u his o w n humán f o r m . O n seeing the M a n u s , those w h o
had been created e a r l i e r — t h e demigods, the G a n d h a r v a s etc.—applauded Brahmá.
51. T h e y p r a y e d : W e are glad. Since ritualistic acts have n o w been established
soundly i n this humán f o r m , w e shall a l l share the s a c r i f i c i a l oblations.
52-53: Creation of the Sages
52. Brahmá evolved great sages as his beloved sons b y equipping himself w i t h                  tapa,
vidyd, yoga, samddhi,       etc.
53. T o each one of these sons, Brahmá gave a part of his o w n body, w h i c h w a s
characterized      by deep         meditation,    mentái      concentration,       supernatural power,
austerity, adoration and renunciation.
Note: I n the 3.10, 12 and 20, sometimes the events of the secondary creation are in
sequence and sometimes somé elements are omitted or put in a different order. The
actual sequence of creation hy Brahmá as given hy Srila Visvanátha Cakravarti
Thákura is - (i) Animals with five joints (ii) Trees and Plants (iii) Snakes (iv) Cows
and Buffaloes (v) Yaksas, Ráksasas, Kinnaras and Kimpurusas (vi) Kumáras (vii)
Manus, humans.
íKi ^^ií '5*l(í *A*l(lí                           T20 Conversation Between Maitreya And Vidura
Verse   Gave up mentality        Created Beings               Possession accepted by
No.     of / Created from                                     created beings / Activities
19      Ignorance (Shadow)       Yaksas and Ráksasas          Night (Hunger and thirst)
22      Goodness                 Demigods                     Day
23-29   Buttocks                 Demons                       Twilight (lust/sex)
38-39   Beauty                   Gandharvas and Apsarás       Moonlight
40-41   Laziness                 Bhütas and Pisácas           AttacK i m n n r e nersnn^
42-43   (a) Tnvisihle fnrm       íai Pitás                     Accpnl" ^y/i/i/ih/j               OTrprioo'C
X V . C C C L / L J1 LiLiU-rl'C*   CllCLlil^o
Ih) Power
44      Antardhána               Siddhas and Vidyádharas      Invisible
45      Reflection               Kimpurusas and Kinnaras      They praise Brahmá in the
dawn
47-48   Anger, (a) Hair          (a) Snakes (ahi)             Cruelty
(b) Hands and legs       (h) Serpents and Nágas
49-50   O w n form (mind)        Manu                         Sacrificial actions will be
established
52-53   Parts of own body        Great sages                  Samádhi, yoga, rddhi, tapa.
vidyd, virakti
Canto 3 Overview
3 . 2 1 CONVERSATION BETWEEN M A N U AND KARDAMA
1-5: Vidura's
inquiries about         About his two sons and three daughters
Manu's dynasty
6-12: Kardama       6-8: Kardama did austerities for 10,000 years
gets Lord's
dars'ana                 9-12: Lord gave His darsana
13: Eyes became successful seeing You
14-15: Less intelligent worship You for matériái j
things. I too desired for a suitable wife.    |
13-22: Kardama'si       16-18: Matériái desires lead to bondage.
prayers to the        Surrender to You leads to liberation. Time
Lord                      doesn't affect devotees
3 . 2 1
Conversation                               19-21: You create matériái world for jivas'
enjoyment and to cause detachment in them by;
between                                                realizing You                 1
Manu and
23-24: My devotee's desires are never
Kardama                                                frustrated
23-32: Lord
speaks to        25-29: Manu will offer you his daughter. You |
Kardama          will heget 9 daughters and Me as a son in her. i
33-37: The Lord ]           30-31: Finally you will attain Me
Left and Manu
arrived with
Devahüti
38-44:
Description of     Contains Lord's tears; Surrounded by beautiful |
trees, creepers, birds, animals etc.     j
Bindu-sarovara
45-47: Bodily appearance of Kardama
45-49: Kardama
received Manu                48-49: Exchange of respect
50-56: Kardama glorified Manu as a responsible i
king and inquired the reason for his visit i
'íS*lfií 'iSíKí '^2*l(í                 íí             3.21 Conversation Between Manu and Kardama
1 . Please describe about the glorious dynasty of Sváyambhuva M a n u , whose progeny
multiplied through procreation.
2. H o w did P r i y a v r a t a and Uttánapáda protect the earth w i t h its seven continents?
3-4.   Please describe about M a n u ' s famous daughter Devahüti, w h o got m a r r i e d to
K a r d a m a . H o w m a n y offspring did that great yogí begot through her?
5. H o w did R u c i and D a k s a generate children after m a r r y i n g the other t w o daughters
of Sváyambhuva M a n u (Áküti and Prasüti)?
L i n k : Maitreya     first described    the descendants      of Devahüti      and     Kardama.
6 - 1 2 : KARDAMA PLEASES T H E LORD A N D GETS H I S DARSANA
6. C o m m a n d e d by Brahmá to produce progeny, K a r d a m a performed austerity for ten
thousand years.
7. K a r d a m a , by w o r s h i p through devotional service i n trance, propitiated the L o r d ,
the giver of benedictions to the surrendered                     (prapanna-varaddsusam).
8. T h e L o r d became pleased and showed H i s f o r m , w h i c h can be understood only
through the          Vedas.
9 - 1 1 : Darsana of the Lord as seen by Kardama
9. K a r d a m a s a w the L o r d effulgent like the s u n , garlanded w i t h white lotuses and
w a t e r lilies, i n y e l l o w síik garments and lotus face surrounded by d a r k locks of hairs.
10. A d o r n e d w i t h a c r o w n and earrings. H e w a s holding sankha,                cakra,    gadd and
w h i t e lily and h a v i n g a smiling glancé captivating devotees.
kiritinam     kundalinam                 sankha-cakra-gadá-dharam
svetotpala-kridanakam                  manah-sparsa-smiteksanam
11. E n d o w e d w i t h Srivatsa and K a u s t u b h a , H e stood in the air w i t h H i s lotus feet
placed on the shoulders of G a r u d a .
vinyasta-carandmbhojam             amsa-dese        garutmatah
drstvd        khe 'vasthitam   vaksah-     sriyam         kaustubha-kandharam
12. K a r d a m a ' s r e a c t i o n - became j o y f u l on having his desires f u l f i l l e d ; w i t h natural
love for the L o r d , he offered obeisances and w i t h földed hands offered prayers.
13. P e r f e c t i o n of eyes - M y eyes have become successful by seeing Y o u , w h o are the
reservoir of all existences. A d v a n c e d yogis practicing yoga for many births aspire to
see Y o u r f o r m .
14. L e s s i n t e l l i g e n t desires -   Y o u r lotus feet can take one across the ocean of
mundane nescience, but less intelligent w o r s h i p those feet to achieve cheap matériái
things. But y o u are so k i n d that y o u bestow Y o u r m e r c y even upon them.
ye mdyaya te hata-medhasas                   tvat-
pádáravindarh            bhava-sindhu-potam
updsate káma-lavdya              tesdm
rdsisa kdmdn niraye         'pi ye     syuh
15. I a m also l i k e t h e m - T h o u g h I criticize such people, I also have w o r s h i p e d Y o u ,
w h o are a desire tree, desiring to m a r r y a girl of like disposition w h o can f u l f i l l all
desires in married life.
L i n k : Then why don't you worship             Me without      matériái          desires?
16. I a m b o u n d b y the i n s t r u c t i o n s of B r a h m á , w h i c h are i n t u r n coming f r o m
Y o u r direction, to create progeny. Y o u are the master of all (even B r a h m á ) . Under
Y o u r direction, everyone, as if bound by rope, are engaged i n satisfying their desires.
L i n k : But, why do you criticize           others' matériái        desires.    What fame and happiness     do
the detached devotees have, giving sorrow                  to their      fathers?
17. S u r r e n d e r e d souls w i l l be l i b e r a t e d - Persons w h o have given up stereotyped
w o r l d l y affairs [lokan)    and the beastly foUowers of these a f f a i r s (lokdnugatdn),              and
have taken shelter of Y o u r lotus feet, by discussing krsna-kathd,                          w h i c h are sweet
(piyüsa)    and intoxicating (sidhu),          w i l l be freed f r o m bodily afflictions.
lokdms ca lokdnugatdn              pasüths      ca
hitvd sritás   te      carandtapatram
parasparam               tvad-guna-váda-sidhu-
piyüsa-niryápita-deha-dharmáh
18. T i m e does not affect the devotees, although it cuts short the life-span of the
entire creation. T h i s time has B r a h m a n as the a x l e , 13 months                      (12 months +
adhikamdsa)        as spokes, 360 days and nights as the joints, 6 seasons as the rím,
unlimited seconds as the edges, 3 groups of four months as the nave and moves w i t h
great velocity.
3.21 Conversation Between Manu and Kardama
19.   Y o u alone are the c r e a t o r , m a i n t a i n e r , destroyer of these universes through
Y o u r yogamdyd       just as spider creates a cobweb by its o w n energy and w i n d s it up.
20.   A l t h o u g h it is not Y o u r desire, Y o u manifest this creation just for our sensual
satisfaction. L e t Y o u r causeless m e r c y be upon us, for Y o u have appeared w i t h Y o u r
eternal f o r m w i t h shining w r e a t h of tulasi leaves.
21. Obeisances unto Y o u r lotus feet, w h i c h is w o r t h y to take shelter, as Y o u shower
all benedictions on the insignificant. T o give d e t a c h m e n t to a l l by realizing Y o u ,
Y o u have expanded these matériái w o r l d s by Y o u r o w n energy.
22.   T h u s addressed sincerely, the L o r d , looking at the sage w i t h a smile f u l l of
affection, began to speak to K a r d a m a w i t h w o r d s as sweet as nectar.
2 3 - 3 2 : T H E L O R D SPOKE   To KARDAMA    ^/////////jjj^
23-29:     Lord fulfils the desire of Kardama for a suitable wife
23. K n o w i n g the desire of your heart, I have already arranged for that for w h i c h y o u
have worshipped M e .
24. T h e desires of people like y o u , w h o sérve M e i n devotion, are never frustrated.
25.    Sváyambhuva             M a n u , w h o is w e l l   k n o w n for his righteous   acts, living in
Brahmávarta, rules the earth w i t h its seven oceans.
26. T h e day after t o m o r r o w , he w i l l come here w i t h his queen, Satarüpá, to see y o u .
27. H e has a g r o w n - u p , marriageable, beautiful and qualified daughter (Devahüti).
H e r parents w i l l come and deliver her to y o u , as y o u are exactly suitable for her.
28. She w i l l be just the type y o u have been t h i n k i n g of in your heart for all these long
years. She w i l l soon be yours and w i l l sérve y o u to your heart's content.
29.   She w i l l bring f o r t h nine daughters f r o m y o u and through them the sages w i l l
duly heget c h i l d r e n .
Link    20      30-31: The Lord responded to Kardama's prayer for mercy in 3.21.20.
30. W i t h your heart cleansed by c a r r y i n g out M y instructions, offering all fruits of all
your acts to M e , y o u w i l l f i n a l l y attain M e .
31. S h o w i n g compassion to all (as a householder), then giving fearlessness to all (as a
sannyási), y o u w i l l perceive yourself and the universes in M e (Mahá V i s n u ) , and
M y s e l f in y o u (Ksirodakasáyi V i s n u ) .
32. B l i s s f u l n e w s - I shall manifest M y o w n plenary portion (Kapiladeva) through
Devahüti, along w i t h your nine daughters, and I shall instruct her in the system of
philosophy that deals w i t h the ultimate principles or categories                 (tattva-samhita).
Canto 3    Overview*iiiJf»jí)jTt2jTj(Tí2^^^
^ ^ ^ ^ \^55-V*^K35fl!?2:í55*'*.J:^.!?.>.;*,5-*^ - -^                         ••^.*zX^~*l^l'f^^.^L
3 3 - 3 7 : T H E LORD LEFT A N D SVÁYAMBHUVA M A N U ARRIVED
33. T h e L o r d , w h o reveals H i m s e l f only w h e n the senses are i n K r s n a consciousness
(pratyag-aksaja),        departed f r o m B i n d u - s a r o v a r a encircled b y R i v e r Sarasvati.
34. T h e sage witnessed the L o r d going through the p a t h w a y leading to V a i k u n t h a , and
listened to the hymns f o r m i n g the hasis of the Sama                          Veda vibrated by the flapping
wings of G a r u d a .
3 5 . K a r d a m a , w a i t i n g f o r the a r r i v a l of M a n u , stayed o n the b a n k of B i n d u - s a r o v a r a .
3 6 - 3 7 . Sváyambhuva M a n u , along w i t h his w i f e and daughter, traveling all over the
earth, arrived at the hermitage of K a r d a m a m u n i o n the predicted day.
3 8 - 3 9 . T h a t holy laké w a s called B i n d u - s a r o v a r a because it w a s m i x e d w i t h the tears
of the L o r d w h o w a s overwhelmed by extrémé compassion f o r the surrendered sage
( K a r d a m a ) . F i i l e d w i t h the waters of the Sarasvati, it w a s pure, auspicious and sweet,
and worshipped by the great sages.
4 0 . T h e shore of the laké w a s surrounded by clusters of pious trees and creepers, r i c h
in flowers and fruits of all seasons that afforded shelter to pious animals and birds.
4 1 . I t w a s resounded w i t h the notes of overjoyed birds. I n t o x i c a t e d becs wandered
there, intoxicated peacocks proudly danced, and m e r r y cuckoos called one another.
4 2 - 4 3 . Bindu-sarovara w a s adorned by f l o w e r i n g trees such as kádamba,                                 campaka,
asoka, karanja,         bakula,     ásana,         kunda,   manddra,      kutaja     and young mangó trees. T h e
air w a s fiiled w i t h the pleasing notes of beautiful b i r d s like kdrandava                           ducks,      piavas,
swans, ospreys, w a t e r f o w l , cranes, cakravdkas                and      cakoras.
44.    I t s shores      abounded          with       animals      like    deer,    boars,      porcupines,           gavayas,
elephants, baboons, lions, monkeys, mongooses and m u s k deer.
4 5 - 4 9 :    KARDAMA RECEIVED M A N U
4 5 - 4 7 . E n t e r i n g the dsrama,      M a n u s a w K a r d a m a having just propitiated the sacred
fire by pouring oblations. A p p e a r a n c e o f K a r d a m a -
(i) body w a s shining
(ii) didn't look emaciated because of the L o r d ' s affectionate glancé                                      (bhagavatah
snigdha apdnga avalokandt)                   and hearing the nectar f l o w i n g f r o m the moonlike
w o r d s of the L o r d                      [tad-vydhrtdmrta-kald-piyüsa-sravanena]
5»_»'**Ve55.v**\c5'L>'**v35.v**v.5'.*'**\c55.»^**
3.21 Conversation Between Manu and Kardama
(iii)   T a l l body, lotus eyes, matted h a i r and tattered cloth
(iv)    H e appeared soiled, like a n unpolished gem.
4 8 . Seeing that M a n u w a s b o w i n g , K a r d a m a m u n i received h i m w i t h due honor.
4 9 . M a n u sat silently. R e m e m b e r i n g the L o r d ' s w o r d s , K a r d a m a addressed M a n u .
5 0 - 5 6 : KARDAMA EXTOLLED THE GLORIES OF KING
5 0 . Y o u travel to protect the v i r t u o u s and k i l l the demons, since y o u emhody the
protecting energy of L o r d S r i H a r i .
5 1 . Whenever necessary, y o u assume the f o r m of various demigods, such as the sun-
god,     the moon-god, A g n i , I n d r a , V a y u , Y a m a , D h a r m a and V a r u n a . A l l obeisances
unto y o u , w h o are none other than L o r d V i s n u !
Note: Manu is compared to different demigods because of exhibiting following
qualities of demigods: sun - majesty, fire - invincibility, Indra - lordship, Vayu -
enter everywhere, Yama - punish the sinful, Dharma - protect the righteous, Varuna
- deep and have hidden treasnre.
5 2 - 5 4 . I f y o u do not tour the earth like the sun w i t h your chariot, h o w and a r m y , the
varnásrama        system established by the L o r d w i l l be destroyed by the rogues.
5 5 . Irreligion w i l l increase, as the unrighteous w o u l d be unopposed, if y o u give up the
thought of w o r l d ' s protection.
5 6 . I n spite of a l l this, w h y have y o u come here? W h a t e v e r it may be, w e shall carry
it out w i t h o u t reservation.
Canto 3 Overview
3 . 2 2 T H E MARRIAGE O F
KARDAMA M U N I A N D DEVAHÜTI
2-4: The Lord protects brahmanas and
1-7: Svayambhuva í             ksatriyas through each other.
Manu glorified
Kardama               5-7: It's my great tortune to associate
with you and hear from you.
9: Great dynasty and she is seeking tor
suitable husband
10: She fixed her mind upon you when
8-14: Manu offered               heard from Nárada Muni
Devahüti to
Kardama mentioning               11: She is suitable tor you
reasons
\j 12-13: Don't deny an otter that came
on its own accord
3.22.The
\       14: You have decided to marry
Marriage of                                   15-18: Our marriage can take place.
Kardama Muni                                  She is so beautiful that even Visvávasu
was stunned to see her. She is from a
And Devahüti         15-20: Kardama                        great tamily.
accepted the offer
with a condition
19-20: But I will stay with her only till
she produces an ottspring and then I will
take to renounced order.
J
Manu gladly ottered his daughter.
21-27: Kardama 1
Satarüpá gave various gitts and with
married Devahüti
teelings ot separation they lett their
and Manu returned
daughter and returned.
29-31: Glory ot Manu's capital
Barhismatí
28-39: Sváyambhuva!
Manu's wonderful          32-38: Manu is constantly engaged in
rule              Krsna Consciouness through out his life
(71 yuga cycies) and taught sacred
duties ot all
r^jfíÉÍ t^fTijíc^J^                                     3.22 The Marriage Of Kardama And Devahüti
1 - 7 : SVÁYAMBHUVA M A N U GLORIFIED KARDAMA
1 . A f t e r describing king's glories K a r d a m a became silent, a n d Sváyambhuva M a n u ,
feeling modesty, addressed h i m as f o l l o w s .
2 . Desiring ro propagate rhe Vedas,            Brahmá created y o u , the B r a h m a n a s , w h o are
f u l l of austerity, knowledge, mysric power a n d are averse to sense gratification.
3-4. F o r rhe protection of the brahmanas,           the L o r d has created us, rhe K s a t r i y a s . T h e
other a n d the L o r d protects t h e m t h r o u g h each other.
5 . N o w I have resolved a l l m y douhts simply b y meeting y o u , as y o u have kindly
explained the duty of a k i n g .
6-7. B y great fortune - (i) I have attained your auspicious and rare association, (ii) I
have touched the dust of your feet to m y bead, ( i i i ) y o u have given me good
instructions a n d (iv) I have listened those w o r d s w i t h open ears             (karna-randhrair).
8 - 1 4 : M A N U O F F E R E D DEVAHÜTI T O KARDAMA
8. Please listen to m y prayer, for m y m i n d is troubled by affection for m y daughter.
9 - 1 4 : Please accept Devahüti for the following reasons:
9.   (i) M y daughter is the sister of P r i y a v r a t a a n d Uttánapáda (great f a m i l y ) .
(ii) She is seeking a suitable husband i n terms of age, character 6c good qualities.
10. (iii) "When she heard f r o m Nárada m u n i about y o u , she f i x e d her m i n d upon y o u .
11. (iv) She w i l l be a suitable w i f e for y o u i n every w a y for duties of household life.
12. (v) T o deny a n offering that has come of itself is not commendable even for the
detached, w h a t to speak of a person w i t h desire for the object.
13. O n e w h o rejects such a n offering but later begs for it f r o m a miser destroys his
fame a n d honor.
14. (vi) Y o u have not taken a v o w of perpetual celibacy and decided to get m a r r i e d .
15-18:1     accept Devahüti for the following reasons
15. C e r t a i n l y I have a desire to m a r r y a n d y o u r daughter has not yet given her w o r d
to anyone. T h e r e f o r e , our marriage according to the V e d i c system c a n take place.
J
16. L e t the desire of your daughter, recognized i n the V e d i c scriptures, be fulfilled.
W h o w o u l d reject her? H e r bodily luster excels the beauty of her ornaments.
17. She is so beautiful that even Visvávasu, the great G a n d h a r v a , w a s stunned by her
beauty and feli f r o m his airplane after seeing her playing w i t h a ball on the terrace.
18. W h a t wise m a n w o u l d not welcome her, the very ornament of w o m a n h o o d , the
daughter of M a n u and sister of Uttánapáda? She is unseen by those w h o do not
w o r s h i p L a k s m i , yet she has come of her o w n accord to seek m y h a n d .
19. B u t there is a c o n d i t i o n - I w i l l stay w i t h her only till she produces an offspring,
after that I shall accept the life of devotional service accepted by the most perfect
humán beings (páramahamsya-mukhyan),                   as explained by L o r d V i s n u .
L i n k : But your father's order was procreation,           not      renunciation!
20. T h e highest authority for me is the unlimited Supreme L o r d w h o does creation,
maintenance and dissolution. H e is the origin of all Prajápatis (including B r a h m á ) .
,, ^          .mmmmtmmmmmmmm
2 1 - 2 7 : KARDAMA MARRÍED DEVAHUTI A N D M A N U RETURNED
21. A f t e r speaking thus, K a r d a m a became silent, t h i n k i n g of K r s n a . A s he silently
smiled, his face captured the m i n d of Devahüti.
22.   Understanding the desire of Satarüpá and Devahüti, M a n u gladly offered his
daughter to K a r d a m a .
23. Empress Satarüpá lovingly gave most valuable presents, such as j e w e l r y , clothes
and household articles, i n d o w r y to the bride and bridegroom.
24. Sváyambhuva M a n u , his m i n d agitated by feelings of separation, embraced his
affectionate daughter w i t h both his arms.
25. Unable to hear the separation he poured tears f r o m his eyes again and again.
26-27. M a n u and Satarüpá then r e t u r n e d to their c a p i t a l w h i l e w a t c h i n g the w e a l t h
of hermitages on the banks of Sarasvati.
í 2 8 - 3 9 : sv^AMB!f^R!ANl?sW^BS5BI^P
28. Overjoyed to k n o w of his a r r i v a l , the citizens of Brahmávarta w e l c o m e d them.
29-32:    Glory of Manu's capital Barhismatí
29-30. T h e city of Barhismatí, fiiled w i t h a l l w e a l t h , w a s so called because L o r d
Varáhadeva's hair dropped there f r o m H i s body and got transformed into kusa and
kása grass, by w h i c h the sages w o r s h i p the L o r d .
3 1 . I n this place, M a n u spread a seat of kusas and kasas and worshiped the L o r d , by
whose grace he had obtained the rule of the planet.
3 2 . E n t e r i n g that city, M a n u then entered his palace, w h i c h w a s fiiled w i t h an
atmosphere that destroys the three miseries.
3 3 - 3 8 : Glorious rule of Manu
3 3 . H e enjoyed w i t h his w i f e and subjects w i t h o u t c o n f l i c t i n g the r e l i g i o n . W h i l e
celestials sang his reputations, early i n the m o r n i n g , every day, he heard                      krsna-kathá.
34. A l t h o u g h absorbed          i n matériái happiness, he being a saintly k i n g , w a s not
degraded, for he enjoyed his matériái happiness i n a K r s n a conscious atmosphere.
35. Being absorbed i n hearing, contemplating, w r i t i n g and chanting about the L o r d ' s
pastimes, h i s l o n g l i f e , consisting of a manvantara          era, d i d not go i n v a i n .
3 6 . H e passed his time, w h i c h lasted 7 1 cycies of the four ages [71 x 4 , 3 2 , 0 0 0 y e a r s ] ,
a l w a y s t h i n k i n g of V á s u d e v a , thus he transcended the threefold miseries.
37. H o w c a n m i s e r i e s pertaining to the body, the m i n d , nature, and other men and
living creatures, b i n d a p e r s o n w h o has taken shelter of the L o r d ?
sárira     manasa divya vaiyase ye ca             manusáh
bhautikás       ca katharh kiesd bddhante            hari-samsrayam
38. A s k e d by the sages, out of compassion for all living entities, M a n u taught the
diverse sacred duties of men i n generál and the different varnas and                            ásramas.
3 9 . I have spoken to y o u the w o n d e r f u l character of Sváyambhuva M a n u , whose
reputation is w o r t h y of description (varnamyasya).                N o w hear about Devahüti.
Canto 3 Overview
Ö l
3 . 2 3 DEVAHÜTI'S LAMENTATION
1-3: Devahüti served hushand
1-8: Kardama          exhihiting the qualities of a chaste
pleased with                        woman
Devahüti's
service            4-8: Pleased, Kardama offéred his
spiritual blessings to her
9-10: Fulfill your promise of giving
9-11: Devahüti's        me children as hearing progeny is a 1
request to                  praiseworthy quality
Kardama for a
child              1 1 : Make my emaciated body fit
and arrange a suitahle house
13-21: Description of the beautiful
aerial mansion that astonished even
Kardama
3.23
Devahüti's                                   22-33: Devahuti entered Bindu-
Lamentation          12-48: Devahüti           sarovara and turnéd Beautiful
and Kardama
enjoyed and gave         34-43: Travel and enjoyment of
birth to nine        Devahüti and Kardama in the aerial
daughters
mansion
'-^ :              y
4 4 - 4 8 : After returning, they hoth
united and nine daughters were
horn
49-52: Seeing her hushand leaving \
after fulfilling his promise, Devahüti
49-57: Devahüti          requested to hestow fearlessness
pleaded Kardama
to stay back             53-57: She lamented for not
utilising hushand's association for
developing knowledge of the Lord
• • m > v      "L^**v,;» ; 5 » t .
1-8: KARDAMA M U N I PLEASED W I T H DEVAHÜTI'S SERVICE
1-3. After her parents departed, Devahuti pleased Kardama muni hy serving him
constantly, with the foiiowing qualities
Chaste (sadhvt)
Understanding the desires of hushand [patim ingita-kovidá)
Great lőve (prityd)
Intimacy (visrambhena)
Purity of mind and hody (átma-saucena)
Great respect [gauravena)
Sense control (damena)
Love (sauhrdena)
Sweet words {vdcd madhurayá)
Giving up all iust, pride, envy, greed, sinful activities and vanity [visrjya -
kámam, dambham, dvesam, lobham, agharh, madám)
•   Working saneiy and diiigentiy (apramattá udyatá nityam)
4-5. Having served him for a iong time, Devahüti grew weak and emaciated. She
expected great hiessings from him. Seeing her condition, Kardama was overcome
with compassion and spoke to her as foiiows.
6. " I am pleased with you, as you have served me without caring for your own hody
which is most dear to aii peopie.
7. A i i the hiessings that I have attained from the Lord through my austerity,
meditation and Krsna consciousness, which are free from fear and lamentation, I
shail offer them to you.
8. What is the use of enjoyments other than the Lord's grace? A i i material
achievements are destroyed hy the movement of the Lord's hrow. By devotion to your
hushand, you have achieved rare transcendental gifts which are difficult to ohtain for
proud persons."
9. Upon hearing her hushand, innocent Devahüti was very satisfied. Shining with a
siightiy hashfui glancé, she repiied in a choked voice.
10. " Y o u have achieved aii this perfection since you are the master of infallihle mystic
powers. Please fuifiii the promise of giving me children, since hearing children
through a hushand is a praiseworthy quality for a chaste woman.
^1
I         Canto 3 Overview   t/^^éV^í^f'tft%'ik^^ft^^
11. Make my emaciated body fit for you to unité and arrange a suitable house for i t . "
12. Desiring to please his wife, Kardama created an aerial mansion that could travel
at his will.
1 3 - 2 1 : DESCRIPTION O F T H E AERIAL MANSION
13     Bcdcckcd with all sorts of iewels                            Can yield whatever is desired
Adorned with piliars of precious stones                      Increasing in wealth
14-    Decorated with flags, festoons and artistic work of          Contains all necessary
15     variegated colours                                           paraphernalia
Emheliished with wreaths of charming flowers that            Pleasing in all seasons
attracted sweetly humming hees
With tapestries of linen, silk and other fahrics
16     With heds, couches, fans and seats                           Arranged in seven stories
17     Artistic engravings on the wails
Fioor was of emerald, with corai daises
18     Corai threshoids at the entrances
Doors hedecked with diamonds
Gold pinnacles crowned its domes of sapphire
19     Choicest ruhies set in its diamond wails                     Wails seemed to possess eyes
Wonderful canopies and vaiuahle gates of gold
20     Live swans and pigeons, artificial swans and pigeons.        Palace vibrated with the
Real swans think of the artificial ones as live like them.   sounds of these birds
21     Pleasure grounds, resting chambers, bedrooms, inner          Kardama himself was
and outer yards                                              astonishment to see them
2 2 - 3 3 : DEVAHÜTI ENTERED BINDU-SAROVARA A N D TURNÉD BEAUTIFUL
22. Even after seeing this beautiful airplane, Devahüti is not very pleased (hecause her
hody is still emaciated and dirty and she did not have servants). Understanding this
Kardama addressed her.
23. "Take hath in this desire fulfilling laké, Bindu-sarovara, created hy Lord Visnu
Himself, and mount this airplane."
24-25. Devahüti entered that laké with her matted hair, emaciated hody, dirty clothes
and discolored hreasts.
26. In a house inside the lake she saw thousand young giris fragrant like lotuses.
27. They said with földed hands, "We are your servants. What we can do for you?"
28-29. The girls hathed Devahüti with vaiuahle oils and ointments and gave her new
cloth, excellent jewels, good food and a sweet drink called ásavam.
30. In mirror Devahüti saw clean, well dressed, garlanded, decorated with tilaka.
31-32. She was fully hathed (including head) and decorated with all ornaments,
special necklaces, hangles, golden anklets and girdle and auspicious suhstances.
33. Her face shone with heautiful teeth, charming eyes, eyehrows and locks of hair.
3 4 - 4 3 : TRAVEL A N D ENJOYMENT O F KARDAMA A N D DEVAHÜTI
IN T H E AERIAL MANSION
34-35. When she rememhered her hushand, she immediately got transported to his
placc along with all the maidservants. She was thus amazed to see his yogic power.
36-37. Seeing Devahüti regain her originál heauty as a princess, Kardama, with
increased fondness, placed her on the aerial mansion.
38. Though seemingly attached, the sage did not lose his glory as a self-controUed
person. In the aerial mansion he, served hy the girls, looked like a moon surrounded
hy many stars.
39-40. Using that aerial mansion, they visited the pleasure valleys of Mount Meru
and other celestial gardens like Vaisramhhaka, Surasana, Nandana, Puspahhadraka
and Caitrarathya, Mánasa-sarovara Lake and enjoyed there for a long time.
41. Travelling like air to other planets in that great aerial mansion, which could fly at
his will (káma-gena), Kardama surpassed even the demigods.
42. What is difficult to achieve for a person who has taken shelter of the lotus feet of
the Lord, which destroy all misfortune?
kim durápádanam tesám pumsám udddma-cetasám
yair dsritas ttrtha-padas carano vyasandtyayah
Note: Kardama achieved such powers hecause of his being a devotee and not hecause
of his proficiency in yoga.
43. After showing the glohe of the universe and its variegated features, full of many
wonders, to Devahüti, Kardama returned to his dsrama.
Canto 3 Overview
4 4 - 4 8 : U N I O N O F KARDAMA A N D DEVAHÜTI
44. Divided himself into nine personalities and delighting Devahuti, Kardama enjoyed
for many years that passed just like a moment.
45-46. Thus enjoying in the wonderful facilities of that aerial mansion, hundred
autumns passed like a moment.
47-48. Kardama dividing himself into nine forms impregnated Devahüti with nine
discharges of semen. On the same day, she gave birth to nine beautiful daughters.
L i n k : Kardama fulfilled his promise (in 3.21.19) of impregnating Devahüti. So, he
wanted to leave home for his real concern of spiritual realization.
4 9 - 5 7 : DEVAHÜTI PLEADS KARDAMA T O STAY BACK
49-50. Seeing her hushand ahout to leave home, Devahüti was pained at heart hut
smiled outwardly. Suppressing her tears, she spoke in slow yet charming accent.
51. " Y o u have fulfilled all the promises, hut you should give me fearlessness too.
52. Indirect request for a son - After you go to forest, your daughters will find their
own suitahle hushands and go away. But who will give me solace?
53. So much time has heen passed hy me uselessly in sense gratification, neglecting to
cultivate knowledge of the Supreme Lord.
54. Not knowing your greatness, I have associated with you while being attached to
enjoyment. Still you should hestow fearlessness unto me.
55. Association of materialists done in ignorance is a cause of bondage, hut
association w i t h devotees, even if performed in ignorance, leads to liheration.
sango yah sarhsrter hetur asatsu vihito 'dhiyá
sa eva sddhusu krto nihsangatvdya kalpate
56. Dharma —» Vairágya         Seva - He, whose actions do not lead to dharma, and
whose dharma does not lead to vairdgya and whose vairdgya does not lead to the
service to the Lord {tirtha pada seva), is just a living corpse.
néha yat karma dharmdya na virdgdya kalpate
na tirtha-pada-sevdyai jivann api mrto hi sah
57. M y Lord, surely I have heen solidly cheated by maya, for in spite of having
ohtained your association, which gives liheration, I did not seek such liheration."
Renunciation of Kardama Muni
3 . 2 4 T H E RENUNCIATION O F KARDAMA M U N I
1-4: Kardama |       Don't be disappointed. The Lord will appear as
instructed i-       your son and instruct you. Laithfully worship
Devahüti                               Him.
j
Appearance of |-      Celebrations hy celestial beings, Brahmá's arrival
Lord Kapila I
12-15: Brahma glorified Kardama for being
exemplary son and instructed him to give away
10-19: Brahma i             nine daughters to different sages
glorified
16-17: Lord Kapila has appeared to uproot
Kardama,
Karma hy mystic yoga with jnána and vijnána
Devahüti and
Lord Kapila          18-19: Brahma glorified Devahüti and predicted
future activities of Kapila
20-25:
Departure of         Brahma returned with Narada and Kumaras, his |
3.24 The      Brahma and           nine sons married to nine daughters of Kardama]
marriage of
Renunciation   nine daughters
of Kardama                            27-29: Your appearance in our home is Your
causeless mercy
Muni       26-34: Kardama i
Muni's prayers           31-33: Glorified Lord's form and qualities
to Lord Kapila
34: Requested permission to renounce
35-37: I appeared to fulfil My promise to you,
35-40:            to explain principles of self-realisation, to revive
Response of                    the knowledge of Sárikhya
Lord Kapila to
Kardama            38-39: Go as you desire and worship Me. You
will achieve eternal life.
41-45: Kardama left to forest and fixed mind onj
41-47:                the Lord and achieved self-realization.    |
Kardama's
renunciation         46: Saw everyone situated in the Lord, and the
and attainment Á                Lord situated in everyone
of Kingdom of i
Godhead             47: By practicing bhakti Kardama returned to
J                  the spiritual world
t
V
Canto 3 Overview   ^^^^M^MM^MÉÍÖMj^^M^^MF
1 . Remembering the words of Visnu, Kardama repiied hack to Devahüti, who was
speaking words full of renunciation.
2. "Do not he disappointed with yourself, you are actually praiseworthy. The
infallihle Lord will shortly enter your womh as your son.
3. Previously, you have undertaken sacred vows. God will hless you. Now, faithfully
worship the Lord with regulation, sense control, austerity and charity.
4. Pleased hy your worship, the Lord will spread my glories. He will cut the knot of
attachment in your heart hy becoming your son and teaching the knowledge of
Brahman."
IPPÍÁRANCE 0 P ^ J J ^ J p j j [ ^
5. With full faith on those directions, Devahüti worshiped the Lord with great
respect.
6. After many years, the Lord, who is like fire in wood, having entered the semen of
Kardama, made His appearance.
7-8. Celebrations by celestial beings - Demigods in the clouds played instruments,
the Gandharvas sang His glories, the Apsarás danced in joy, the demigods showered
flowers and all the directions, waters and minds hecame satisfied.
9. Brahma, along with Marici and other sages, arrived at that place.
1 0 - 1 9 : BRAHMA GLORIFIED KARDAMA A N D D E V A H Ü T I ' " ^ ' ^ ^ " ' ^ ^
A N D PREDICTED FUTURE ACTIVITIES O F L O R D KAPILA
10-11. Brahma, understanding ahout the Lord's appearance, worshiped H i m and
addressed the couple as follows.
12. Brahma said to K a r d a m a : By accepting and foUowing my instructions without
duplicity and respect you have properly worshiped and honored me.
tvayd me 'pacitis tdta kalpitd nirvyalikatah
yan me sanjagrhe vdkyam bhavdn mdnada mdnayan
13. This is how one serves his father and spiritual master hy oheying the instructions
with due respect, saying, "Yes, sir."
3.24 The Renunciation of Kardama Muni
etavaty eva susrusa karya pitari putrakaih
bádham ity anumanyeta gauravena guror vacah
14-15. Y o u r nine daughters are certainly very chaste and will increase this creation
hy their own descendants in various ways. Offer them to the foremost of the sages,
with due regard for the girls' temperaments and likings.
16. I know that the Lord has now appeared as Kapila hy His internál energy.
17. By mystic yoga with jnána and vijnána, Kapila Muni, with golden hair, lotus eyes
and lotus feet, will uproot the deep-rooted desire for karma.
18. Brahma said to Devahüti: The same Supreme Lord, who killed Kaitahha, is now
within your womh. After cutting all the knots of your ignorance and douht. He will
travel all over the world.
19. He will he the foremost among the perfected heings [siddha-ganádhisah),
approved hy the ácáryas of Sáiikhya philosophy [sánkhyácáryaih susammatah), and
will he known hy the name Kapila, and will increase your fame [kirti-vardhanah).
20. After thus speaking, Brahma departed for Satyaloka on his swan carrier along
with Narada and Kumaras (as they were naisthika-brahmacáris).
21-23. Kardama Muni offered his daughters in marriage to the nine sages:
Kardama's Daughter       Married to Sage
Kalá                  Marici
Anasüyá                  Atri
Sraddhá                Ahgirá
Havirbhü               Pulastya
Gati                  Pulaha
Kriyá                 Kratu
Khyáti                 Bhrgu
Arundhati              Vasistha
Sánti                Atharvá
24-25. Kardama took care of the daughters and sons-in-law for somé time, and then
they happily departed to their ásramas.
26. Understanding that the Supreme Lord had descended, Kardama approached Lord
Kapila in a secluded place, offered oheisances and spoke as follows.
27-29: Your appearance in my house is by Your mercy
27. Demigods hecome pleased with the suffering souls only after a long time.
28. After many hirths, mature yogts, hy complete trance in yoga, endeavor in secluded
places to see the lotus feet of the Lord.
29. Lord's Mercy - But the same Lord has appeared now in our house, to support
His devotees, not considering the negligence of ordinary householders like us.
30. My dear Lord, who always increase the honor of devotees [bhaktdnám mdna-
vardhanah), You have descended in my home to make Your words (in 3.21.32) true,
and desiring to give the process of real knowledge.
31-33: Glories of Lord's form and Kardama's surrender to the Lord
31. Although Y o u have no material form, You have Your own innumerahle forms.
They truly are Your transcendental forms, which are pleasing to Your devotees.
tdny eva te 'bhirüpdni rüpdni bhagavams tava
ydni ydni ca rocante sva-janándm arüpinah
32. I surrender unto Y o u , who are full of six opulences [aisvarya, vairdgya, yasa,
avabodha, virya, sriya). Your lotus feet are always worthy of worship hy the devotees
desiring direct knowledge of the Ahsolute Truth.
33. I surrender unto Kapila, who is - independently powerful and transcendental,
Supreme Person, mahat-tattva, time, fully cognizant, maintainer of all the universes
under the three gunas, ahsorhs universes after dissolution.
34. Now that Y o u have appeared, I have hecome free of deht, all my desires have
heen fulfilled, so please give me the permission to renounce this world.
Note: Why Kardama wanted to renounce in spite of having the Lord as his son?
(i)    To follow Vedic injunctions that one should leave home at certain age.
(ii)    To avoid the mixture of ddsya and vdtsalya, as he had heen fixed in the Lord
since birth as a servant.
(iii)   Lord will make him renounce anyway. Why not renounce immediately?
(iv)    More important is to worship and remember the Lord constantly.
,24 The Renunciation of Kardama Muni
•
3 5 - 4 0 : RESPONSE O F L O R D KAPILA T O KARDAMA
35-37: Reason for My appearance
35. Whatever I speak, whether directly or in the scriptures, is authoritative in all
respects. I have appeared as your son because 1 promised you before (in 3.21.32).
36. M y appearance in this world is to explain the principles of self-realization for
those desiring freedom from material desires.
37. This path was lost in time. I have come to revive this knowledge of Sahkhya.
38-39: Lord Kapila's instructions to Kardama
38. N o w , being requested hy Me, go as you desire, surrendering all your activities to
Me; worship Me for eternal life.
39. Then you will always see Me within your heart as Supersoul hy your intelligence.
Thus you will achieve the state of eternal life, free from all lamentation and fear.
40. I will also describe this knowledge to M y mother, so that she will also attain
perfection and will he freed from fear.
4 1 - 4 7 : KARDAMA'S RENUNCIATION A N D ATTAINMENT O F KINGDOM O F Gojg..^^.,^^
41. Kardama circumamhulated the Lord and with a pacified mind, he at once left for
the forest.
42. He accepted mauna-vrata and taking complete shelter of the Lord, he wandered
the earth alone, without fire and without shelter.
43. He fixed his mind on the Lord, Parahrahman, who is - heyond cause and effect,
manifests three gunas, heyond gunas, perceived only through bhakti.
44. Thus he hecame free from falsé ego, material affection and achieved self-
realization. H i s mind was perfectly calm like an ocean unagitated hy waves.
45. He thus hecame liberated from conditioned life and hecame self-situated in
devotional service to the Lord.
46. He saw the Lord seated in everyone's heart (as Ksirodakasayí Visnu), and saw
everyone existing on H i m (as Káranodakasáyi Visnu).
Note: The Lord foretold in 3.21.31 that Kardama will achieve this state.
47. Freed from all hatred and desire, being equal to everyone, and hy devotional
service, Kardama ultimateiy attained the path hack to Godhead.
Canto 3 Overview   l/fj^J^M^^J^^^J^M^
3 . 2 5 T H E GLORIES O F DEVOTIONAL SERVICE
1-5: Saunaka Rsi's               Glorification of Lord Kapila
inquires about Lord f
Kapila            7: l'm disgusted with material desires leading \
to ignorance                   j
6-11: Devahüti's            8-9: You can dissipate this darkness          \
questions to Lord
Kapila               10-11: Q l - Dispel this illusion of 'aham
mameti'; Explain about jiva and prakrti
12-18: Adhyátmika-          13-14: Adhyátmika-Yoga consisting of
Sárikhya, Yoga and Bhakti.
Voga and its
description (Answer ^    15-18: Pivotal
Pi      role of mind and symptoms of |
toQI)                             liberated mind              j
3 . 2 5 The                                 119-20: Only auspicious path is bhakti which is|
attained hy association of sádhus.       |
Glories of
Devotional                                     21-23: Characteristics and activities of a
Service            19-27: Supremacy of                        Sádhu
Bhakti over Jnána
and Yoga            24-25: Sádhu's association can gradually lead
one to prema
26-27: Practice of Jhána and Yoga is          Q
incomplete without bhakti.
Q 2 : What kind of bhakti will help to easily
28-30: Devahüti':                        attain You?
further questions
Q 3 , Q 4 : Explain Jhána, Yoga and its limbs.
32-33: Recommended Spontaneous Bhakti
(bháva)
31-44: Lord Kapila       34-38: Characteristics of devotees in hhava
answered Q2                   39-40: VaidTii-Sádhana-Bhakti
41-44: Greatest benefit possible only by
offering one's mind in pure bhakti to Me.
f:^éí'&ií''&'íí'*&^ií''&'tf'&W                         3.25 The Glories Of Devotional Service
1-5: SAUNAKA RSI'S EAGERNESS T O HEAR A B O U T LORD KAPILA
1-3. Saunaka R s i : Please descrihe to us the activities of Lord Kapila as
•   He is unhorn (aja), yet took hirth as Lord Kapila hy His yogamáyá, to
disseminate transcendental knowledge (Sánkhya) to the mankind.
•   He is most knowledgeahle, worshipahle, the master of the Vedas.
•   T o hear ahout H i m always is the actual pleasure of the senses.
4. Süta Gosvámi: Being encouraged hy Vidura's inquiry, Maitreya spoke as follows.
5. After Kardama Muni left, Lord Kapila stayed at Bindu-sarovara to please His
mother Devahüti.
6-11: DEVAHÜTI'S QUESTIONS To LORD KAPILA
6. Rememhering the words of Brahma, Devahüti hegan to question Lord Kapila who
could show her the ultimate goal of the Ahsolute Truth [tattva-márgágra-darsanam).
7. I am very sick of the disturhance caused due to material senses hy which I have
fallen into ignorance.
8. You are my transcendental eye {sat-caksur) and the one who makes me cross over
(páragam) this ignorance. After many hirths today I attained Y o u , hy Your mercy.
9. You have arisen like the sun to dissipate the darkness of ignorance of the
universe.
10. [ Q l ] Please dispel my illusion of 'aham mameti' due to my falsé ego and created
by Your maya.
Note: It is Your maya alone that has bewildered me and I should ask You only.
11.1 take Your shelter (saranam), hecause Y o u are the
(i) only person of whom to take shelter (saranyam).
(ii) axe, which can cut the tree of material existence of Your devotees (sva-bhrtya
samsdra-taroh kuthdram).
(iii) hest of the knowers of hhakti (sad-dharma-vidárh varistham)
So, please explain ahout the jiva in material world (purusa) and prakrti.^
Note: Purusa is the Supreme Lord or anyone who imitates Him as an enjoyer (jiva)
and tries to exploit prakrti. The intricacies in the material world of the relationship of
prakrti (enjoyed) and purusa (enjoyer), is called sarhsdra, or material entanglement.
' Lord Kapila describes about purusa and prakrti in 3.26.3-8. Devahüti asks Him to elaborate
on this topic in 3.26.9 [Q3a]. Lord Kapila then elaborates further in 3.26 and 27.
12-27:^^^WER T o Q l -          ^pj^^^JJ^J^^N^f^SSSSf
12. Hearing His mother's uncontaminated desire (niravadyam ipsitam) for increasing
the liheration of the humanity (puthsdm apavarga-vardhanam). Lord Kapila thanked
her mentally and explained the path of devotees (satám gatir).
13-15: Ádhyátmika-Yoga
13. I consider ádhyátmika-yoga (the yoga system concerning the soul), as the most
heneficial (nihsreyasdya) as it causes detachment (uparatih) from material happiness
and distress.
yoga ádhyátmikah pumsám mato nihsreyasdya me
atyantoparatir yatra duhkhasya ca sukhasya ca
Note: Ádhydtmika-yoga consists of three types - (i) Bhakti, (ii) Jnana (or Sahkhya)
and (iii) Astáhga-yoga (or yoga). This is the seed verse expanding these three topics
into eight chapters of sánkhya-yoga (3.25-32).
14. A l l the limbs of this ancient yoga system are easy to perform (yogam sarvdnga-
naipunam). I explained this to the great sages eariier, and now I will explain to you.
15. The mind is the pivot. If the mind is attached to material modes, it causes
hondage and if it is attached to the Supreme Lord it causes liheration.
16-18: Symptoms of liberated mind
16. When one's mind is cleansed of the impurities like lust and greed produced from
falsé ego, one transcends material happiness and distress.
17. At that time the soul can see himself to he transcendental, self-effulgent, nevet
fragmented, although very minute in size.
18. H o w does the mind reach this stage? - By bhakti endowed with jnána and
vairdgya, one sees everything in the right perspective (paripasyati). He hecomes
indifferent to material existence and the material influence acts less powerfuUy on
him.
MIBBiy9-27:           SUPREMACY Q F j f a A K n Q v E R j y i A m
L i n k 15 —• 19: Mind attached to the Lord leads to liheration. And the best process of
attaching the mind to the Lord is bhakti.
19. Perfection in self-realization cannot he attained hy any kind of yogi unless he
engages in bhakti, for that is the only auspicious path.
^&'íf^&'éí''^íV'&'ét'^^tÍ^^^                             3.25 The Glories Of Devotional Service
na yujyamanayá bhaktya bhagavaty akhilatmani
sadrso 'sti sivah panthá yoginárh brahma-siddhaye
20. H o w to get bhakti? - Materialistic association is the greatest entanglement. But
association of sádhus opens the door of liheration.
prasangam ajararh pasam átmanah kavayo viduh
sa eva sddhusu krto moksa-dvdram apdvrtam
21-23: Characteristics and Activities of a Sádhu
21. Secondary characteristics - tolerant, merciful, friendly to all heings, without
enemies, peaceful and ahides hy the scriptures.
titiksavah kdrunikdh suhrdah sarva-dehindm
ajdta-satravah sdntdh sddhavah sddhu-bhüsandh
22. Primary characteristics - engages in staunch (ananya) devotional service to the
Lord without deviation (drdhdm) and renounces all material actions and relations to
attain the Lord.
mayy ananyena bhdvena bhaktim kurvanti ye drdhdm
mat-krte tyakta-karmdnas tyakta-svajana-bdndhavdh
23. Activities - ahsorption in hearing, chanting and rememhering Me and thus does
not suffer from material miseries.
mad-dsraydh kathd mrstdh srnvanti kathayanti ca
tapanti vividhds tdpd naitdn mad-gata-cetasah
24-25: Associate with such sádhus to get Premá
(Stages i n developing attraction to the Lord)
24. M y dear mother, seek attachment to such detached sddhus, for this will destroy
the evil effects of material attachment.
Note: Association of sádhus should be desired. Then faith (sraddhá) first arises. Then
one should associate with sddhus (sádhu-sanga).
25. Krsna-kathd in the association of sddhus is very pleasing and satisfying to the ear
and heart and can give you ruci, dsakti, bhdva and premd in sequence.
satdm prasangdn mama virya-sarhvido
bhavanti hrt-karna-rasdyandh kathdh
taj-josandd dsv apavarga-vartmani
sraddhd ratir bhaktir anukramisyati
I        Canto 3 Overview           l'fí'iSsTiíltJjfá^^
Note: From inferior association of sádhus, there is only bhajana-kriyá, but krsna-
kathd does not become nectar by that. In excellent association, krsna-kathd causes
anartha-nivrtti and then becomes direct realization (samvidah) of Lord's great
qualities (virya) and produces nisthá. Then it becomes an elixír for the heart and ears
at the stage of ruci (josandt). From that asakti (sraddhd), bháva (ratih) and prema
(bhaktih) follow in order (anukramisyati).
Link: Having described pure bhakti. Lord Kapila will describe yoga now.
26-27:      Practice of Jnána and Yoga is not complete without Bhakti
26. Being disgusted with sense gratification, thinking ahout M y activities and
endeavoring to control mind through yoga, he will come on the correct path of yoga.
Note: This is bhakti-misra-yoga (primary element is astdnga-yoga and secondary
element is bhakti) by which one continues on the path of yoga made easy by bhakti.
Link: Having described yoga. Lord Kapila will describe jhána now.
27. Thus hy not engaging in the service of material modes, hut developing hhakti,
knowledge in renunciation, and hy practicing yoga, one achieves Me in this very life
as impersonal Brahman (pratyag dtmá).
Note: This is bhakti-misra-jnána (primary element is jhána, and secondary elements
are bhakti and astáhga-yoga), which leads to impersonal liheration.
L i n k 19       28: Hearing the excellence of bhakti as suitable for the Lord in 3.25.19,
Devahüti asks Q 2 (tvayy ucitd bhaktih) in 3.25.28.
m                                                                               Answered in
Q2     What kind of bhakti should I perform to easily attain Your feet?       3.25.31-44
(3.25.28)
Q3      Lxplain the jnána by which one understands the tattvas}                3.26, 27
(3.25.29)
Q4      Explain the yoga aimed at the Lord for liheration. How many              3.28
limbs does it have? (3.25.29)
Note: An inquisitive person knows his own idea, and intelligent peopie know others'
ideas as well. Thus although Devahüti understands that she should perform bhakti
approved by the Lord, she also inquires about yoga and jnána.
--'^ _ z ± l i ^ L ;              ™ zf2^2^
fiWii                          •ífí
3.25 The Glories Of Devotional Service
30. M y intelligence is not very great to understand the Absolute Truth, hut I can
understand it easily hy Your mercy.
31 -44: LORD KAPILA ANSWERED Q 2 (ASKED IN 3.25.28)                  ^^^^^^n
31. Knowing His mother's purpose. Lord Kapila compassionately described to her
Sánkhya, which is a comhination of bhakti and yoga.
L i n k 28 -+ 32: The bhakti suitable for the Lord (tvayy ucitd bhaktih) is the bhakti
beyond the gunas.
32. B h a k t i performed without material desires consisting of (i) senses that sérve the
Supreme Lord as confirmed hy the scriptures and guru and (ii) mind that is exclusively
dedicated to the Lord - on a spontaneous levél (bháva), is superior to liheration.
devdndm guna-lingdndm dnusravika-karmandm
sattva evaika-manaso vrttih svdbhdviki tu yd
animittd bhdgavati bhaktih siddher gariyasi
33. Such bhakti quickly destroys the subtle body as the digestive fire consumes food.
jarayaty dsu yd kosath nigirnam analo yathd
Note: The spontaneity [bhdva stage) is developed either from vaidht-bhakti (as
explained in 3.25.34-37) or rágdnuga-bhakti (as explained in 3.25.38). Compared to
these two spontaneous types, unspontaneous bhakti (only vaidhi-sádhana) is inferior
(as explained in 3.25.39-40).
34-38: Characteristics of a devotee in bháva attained by vaidhí-bhakti (34-37)
and rágánuga-bbakti (38)
34    i      never desire impersonal liheration (naikátmatdm)
ii     always engage in the service of My lotus feet (mat-pdda-sevdbhiratdh)
iii     glorify My activities in association of devotees [sabhdjayante mama paurusdni)
35   iv      see My attractive smiling face with red eyes (prasanna-vaktrdruna-locanáni)
V      see My various benevolent transcendental forms (rüpdni divydni vara-praddni)
vi      talk favourably with Me (vácam sprhaniydrh vadanti)
36   vii     bhakti gives liheration without separate endeavour, although not desiring it
37   viii don't desire higher planets, asta-siddhis or even the kingdom of God, but they
attain all benedictions even in this life and I award them My own abode
38   ix      they are not deprived of any opulence or affected by time, because they accept the
Lord as their lover, son, friend etc, in the spiritual world.
I   Canto 3 Overview    ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ r | ^ ^ | g ^ ^
L i n k : For   those devotees who are    not qualified for    bháva-bhakti,   which is
spontaneous (32-38), vaidhi-sddhana-bhakti, which is non-spontaneous (39-40) is
recommended.
39-40. Vaidhi-sádhana-bhakti - Giving up all attachments of this world and the
next, the devotee exclusively worships Me, thus I take them heyond hirth and death.
41. Fear of material world cannot he overcome hy any means except hy devotion to
Me as Lord Krsna, Ráma or purusdvatáras.
L i n k : Won't the devatds become angry if one just worships You?
42. Wind hlows, the sun shines, Indra pours rain, fire hurns and death flees all out of
fear of Me.
mad-bhaydd vdti vdto 'yam süryas tapati mad-bhaydt
varsatindro dahaty agnir mrtyus carati mad-bhaydt
43. The yogfs take shelter of My lotus feet, hy bhakti equipped (mixed) with jndna
and vairdgya, for highest perfection (entering into the kingdom of Godhead without
fear).
Note: According to Srila Visvanátha Cakravarti Thákura, 3.25.43 is about bhakti-
misra jndnis and bhakti-misra yogis (mixed devotees).
44. The greatest henefit can he achieved only hy offering one's mind in intense bhakti
(tívra bhakti) to Me.
etdvdn eva loke 'smin pumsdth nihsreyasodayah
tivrena bhakti-yogena mano mayy arpitam sthiram
"-fijmmmiMm                        3.26 Fundamental Principles Of Material Nature
3 . 2 6 FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES O F MATERIAL NATURE
(i) Freedom from modes (ii) Self-
1-2: Benefits of hearing
realization (iii) Cutting the knot of
Sánkhya
attachment
3-4: Lord's interaction with prakrti is
3-8: Jiva-prakrti-purusa            just a pastime by His will.
interactions and
characteristics          5-8: Jiva's interaction with prakrti leads
to his bondage
26.                                      10-14: Characteristics and products of i
Fundamental                                                Pradhana
Principles of                                    15-18: Characteristics of Time
Material
Nature                                    19-22: Characteristics of Mahat-tattva ;
and citta
23-26: Characteristics of falsé ego
27-31: Characteristics of products of
9-14: Answer to             falsé ego in sattva and rajas (mind,
Devahuti's question -                 intelligence, senses)
Describe more about
prakrti and purusa          32-49: Characteristics of products of |
falsé ego in tamás (tan-matras and 5 i
gross elements)
50-53: Kárya-srsti
54-61: Creation of the various limbs of
virát-rüpa
62-72: Devatás' attempts to wake up
virát-purusa- only Vásudeva woke up
virát-purusa
Canto 3 Overview
L i n k : In 3.25.28-29, Devahüti asked Kapiladeva about bhakti [Q2], jndna [Q3] and
yoga [Q4] and Kapila explained about bhakti (3.25.31-44) and His mother was fully
satisfied with that. Although bhakti is supreme and without bhakti, karma, jndna and
yoga cannot give results of svarga or liheration, a person engaged in bhakti is also
inquisitive about karma, jndna and yoga.
In 3.26, Kapila will discuss Jnána / Sdnkhya [Answer to Q3] - the manifestation and
characteristics of the elements such as Mahat-tattva, the universal form composed of
those elements, and its being brought to life by the entrance of the Lord.
1-2.1 will describe the different features of elements, knowing which one
(i) is freed from influence of material modes [vimucyeta prdkrtair gunaih)
(ii) attains perfection of self-realization (dtma-darsanam)
(iii) cuts the knot of attachment to material world (hrdaya-granthi-bhedanam)
- 8 : J i v A - P R i i M r - P u R u s A INTERACTIONS A N D CHARACTERISTICS
3. Characteristics of Purusa (Lord) - without a heginning (anddir), Supreme Soul
(dtmd), transcendental to material modes (nirgunah), heyond material world
(prakrteh parah), perceivahle everywhere (pratyag-dhdmd), self-effulgent (svayarh-
jyotir), hy H i m the entire creation is maintained (visvarh yena samanvitam).
4. Purusa's interaction w i t h p r a k r t i (material nature) is just a pastime hy His will.
5-7: Jiva's interaction with prakrti
5. Seeing the various
6. The bewildered                      7. This
forms offered hy the
jiva thinks that he                misconception
prakrti, Jiva hecomes
is the doer of                  leads to jiva's
bewildered hy avidyd
activities hy falsé                hondage and
(jndna-gühayd or
Identification with                repeated hirth
knowledge-covering
prakrti.                      and death.
feature)
'AMllMfiit                                       3.26 Fundamental Principles Of Material Nature
8a. The cause of the jiva's actions is P r a k r t i , hecause
•     Prakrti is the cause of jiva's hody, senses and sense devatás.
8b. The cause of the results of jiva's actions is Purusa (the jiva or the Lord) hecause,
•     The jiva has his free choice either to sérve his own senses and accept a material
hody or to engage in Krsria consciousness and get a spiritual hody.
•     The L o r d is the bestower of the results of jiva's actions.
9. Devahüti: [Q3a] Descrihe more ahout the characteristics of prakrti and purusa.
10-14. Pradhana
X
10: Characteristics                11-14: Products (24 elements)
Unmanifested (avyakta)                  5 gross elements
5 tan-mátras
Eternal [nityam)                    (sense objects)
Aggregáté of three modes
[trí-gunam)                          10 senses
Cause of prakrti, the                4 antah-karanas (mind,
manifested stage of existence           inteiiigence, faise ego
and citta).
Consists of cause and effect
(sad-asad-átmakam)
Undifferentiated, yet has
variety [avisesaifi visesavat)
HÁRACTERISTICS
15                             25th element
18                             Instigator of fear of death in the conditioned jivas
Agitátor of gunas in prakrti that leads to material creation
Lord exists internally as Paramátmá externally as time
19-     Mahat-tattva           After the prakrti is agitated by time, the Lord impregnates it
21                             with the jivas and it gives birth to the effulgent mahat-tattva.
Sum totál of the cosmic intelligence, also called Hiranmaya.
Consumes the darkness of dissolution through its effulgence
Sattva-guna (clear, sober status of understanding Lord), which
is called Vásudeva, or citta manifests in mahat-tattva.
r.inlo '? f")v22       Citta                        Representation of mahat-tattva in the body of the jiva
(Consciousness)              Complete serenity (sdntatvam), clarity (svacchatvam), and
freedom from distraction (avikdritvam).
23-       Ahankára (Falsé             Mahat-tattva transforms into ahankára
26        ego)                        3 types: goodness (vaikdrika), passión (taijasa), ignorance
(tdmas)
Presiding deity: Sahkarsana.
Characteristics: Acts as the doer (kartrtvarh), as an instrument
(karanatvarh) and as an effect (kdryatvarh). Also acts as
serene, active or dull as per the influence of modes.
27-       Manas (Mind)                Appears from falsé ego in sattva.
28                                    Characteristics: thoughts (sankalpa) and reflections (vikalpa)
of mind gives rise to desire.
Presiding deity: Aniruddha
29-      Buddhi                       Appears from falsé ego in rajas
30       (Intelligence)               Characteristics: helps in ascertaining the nature of objects
(dravya-sphurana-vijndnam), to help the senses (indriydndm
anugrahah), douht (sarhsayah), misapprehension (viparyásah),
correct apprehension (niscayah), memory (smrtih) and sleep
(svdpah)
31        Indriya (Senses)       • Appear from falsé ego in rajas
• 2 types: 5 action senses that depend on the vitai energy
(prana), 5 knowledge senses that depend on intelligence
(buddhi)
32        Tan-matras and         • Appear from falsé ego in tamás
Elements               • Sound    Ether    Touch     Air - y Form —>• Fire —> Taste
Water    Smell    Earth.
3 3 - 4 6 : CHARACTERISTICS O F TAN-MÁTRAS A N D 5 G R O S S ELEMENTS
Element                                      Characteristics
33         Sound
of a speaker screened from our view.
34          Ether       Provides space for the living entities e
base for prana, senses and mind.
35-        Touch
36                      attributes
37           Air        Moving, mixing, leading sense objects to senses, and giving life to senses.
WMmmmL                                       3.26 Fundamental Principles Of Material Nature
38-     Form      Tan-mátra of fire; Allows understanding of dimension, quality and
individuality.
40      Fire     Illumination, ability to cook, to digest, to destroy cold, to evaporate, and
to give rise to hunger, thirst, eating and drinking.
41-     Taste     Tan-mátra of water; Although one, taste becomes manifold as astringent,
42                sweet, bittér, pungent, sour and salty.
43     Water     Moistening, making balls, causing satisfaction, giving life, relieving thirst,
softening, extinguishing beat, and being plentiful.
44-     Smell     Tan-mátra of earth; Although one smell becomes many as mixed, foul,
45                fragrant, mild, strong, acidic - according to the suhstances it associates.
46     Farth     Place of sustenance for all beings; modeling of deity forms, steadiness
(places of residence), accommodating power (pots), ability to make other
elements perceptible, power to manifest differences in all beings
47-49. Sound —> Ether —> T o u c h —> A i r —> F o r m        Fire      Taste —> Water -+
Smell —> F a r t h . Since the cause exists in its effect as well, the characteristics of the
former exist in the later.
Example: Unique quality of water is taste. It contains all qualities up to taste, i.e.
sound, touch, form and taste.
5 0 - 5 3 : KÁRYA-SRSTI
50. When all the elements were unmixed, the Supreme Lord entered the universe
along with kála, karma and gunas.
51. When those elements roused into activity and united by the presence of the Lord,
an unintelligent egg arose, from which appeared the virát-rüpa.
52. Within this universal egg is the universal form (14 planetary systems), which is
covered outside by seven layers. Fach outside layer is ten times thicker than the
previous layer. Final outside layer is covered by pradhána.
53. The virát-purusa situated Himself in that golden egg, which was lying on the
water, and He divided it into many departments.
B ^ ^ 4 - 6 1 : CREATION O F j i ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ j P f ^ ^ H H B
Rule for formation of the organs:
Lord's gross sense organ —>• subtle sense organ of virát-rüpa + sense devatá
Gross sense organ                     Subtle sense organ                  Sense devata
Mouth (mukham)                        Speech (váni)                       Fire [vahni)
Nostrils (náse)                      olfactory sense [ghrána)             Wind-god [váyu)
Eyes (aksini)                        Sense of sight (caksuh)              Sun-god [sürya)
Ears (karnau)                        Auditory sense (érotram)             Dig-devatás
Skin (tvak), hair (roma),            Sense of touch                       Herbs, the devatás of the skin
mustache, beard (smasru)                                                  [osadhayah)
Genitals (sisnam)                     Semen                               Deity of waters [apa)
Anus (gudam)                          Organs of defecation                Death [mrtyu)
Hands (hastau)                        Power of grasping and               Indra
dropping things
Legs(pádau)                           Process of movement                 Visnu
Veins (nádyah)                        Blood [lohitam]                     Rivers, the deities presiding
over the veins [nadyah)
Abdomen (udaraih)                    Feelings of hunger and thirst        Ocean [samudra)
Heart (hrdayarh)                     Mind [manas)                         Candra
Intelligence [buddhi)                Lord Brahmá
Falsé ego [ahankára)                Lord Siva
Consciousness [citta)               Lord Vásudeva (caityah)
6 2 - 7 2 : DEVATÁS' ATTEMPTS T O W A K E U P Y I R Á T - P U R U S ^ | | | | | | | J | [ ^
62-69. The devatás then wanted to wake up the virát-purusa. But upon failing to do
so, they reentered the respective apertures of the virát-rüpa along with the subtle
sense, one after another, to wake up the virát-rüpa. But they were unsuccessful.
Example: Fire god entered His mouth along with organ of speech, etc.
70. However, when Vásudeva entered the heart along with the citta, the virát-rüpa
rose up from water.
71. Example: The pránas, mind and intelligence cannot wake up a sleeping individual
without the intervention of the Supersoul.
72. Goal of explaining the analysis of elements - T o contemplate on the Supersoul
through devotion, detachment and spiritual knowledge.
^
3.27. Understanding Material Nature
3 . 2 7 . UNDERSTANDING MATERIAL NATURE
2-4: Cause of conditioning of jiva is falsé
Identification with prakrti.
1-5: Jiva in
conditioned state
5: Solution is to gradually control mind i
through hhakti, yoga and virakti
6: Process = Astanga yoga + hearing +
faith on Lord
6-11: Attaining
liheration hy yoga           7-10: 18 qualities to be cuitivated hy I
jöáni                 I
12-13: inferring the             11: Characteristics of the Lord
presence of soul and
Supersoul
3.27.       14-16: Soul without            During deep sleep or at the time of
Understanding    material coverings                   universal destruction
material
17-20: Devahüti's          17-19: Since prakrti and jiva are attractedl
nature                                   to each other how is liheration possible? \
questions about
rarity of liheration
20: Fear of bondage may reappear again l
21-23: Kapila            intense hhakti for a long time, perfect
recommends intense           knowledge and renunciation, austerity,
practice                      yoga and self-ahsorption
24-26: Prakrti              Sees the faults of prakrti, knows the
cannot harm an              truth, with mind fixed on the Lord, he
eniightened soul                         enjoys in self.
Engages in self-realization for many life i
27-30: Final             times with complete detachment and \
liheration of yogi         bhakti, and hy Lord's mercy, he attains :
liheration
L i n k : In 3.27, Kapila discusses the method of Bhakti-misra-jndna and the method for
attaining liheration [Answer to Q3].
1-5: JívA IN CONDITIONED STATE
1. The jiva, although situated in prakrti, is unaffected by its gunas, because he is
unchanging (avikárdd) and not the proprietor (akrtavdn), just as the sun remains
aloof from its reflection on the water.
2. When the same jiva becomes absorbed in the gunas oí prakrti and bewildered by
the falsé ego, he falsely thinks that he is the proprietor of everything.
3. Thus he performs faulty action and moves in saihsára (repeated hirth and death) in
good, had and mixed species of life.
4. Although transcendental, his troublesome material condition does not cease
hecause of his constant meditation on sense objects (hy mind), thinking himself to he
the doer.
5. Solution - to gradually control the materially attached mind through bhakti, yoga
with detachment (virakti).
6 - 1 1 : ATTAINING LIBERATION BY JNÁNA
6. Process - (i) Faithfully practice astanga-yoga [yama, niyama, etc), (ii) with
devotion and faith that I am real and (ii) hearing M y topics.
Note: In bhakti-misra jnána, which aims at impersonal liheration, the primary
element is jhána, and the secondary elements are bhakti and astanga-yoga.
7-10:18 qualities to be cuitivated by the jnáni
sarva-bhüta-samatva                 Fquality to all jivas
nirvaira                           No enmity
aprasanga                           No intimate connections
brahmacarya                         Celibacy
mauna                              Being grave
sva-dharmena baliyasá               Offering results of one's activities to the Lord
yadrcchayopalabdhena santusto Satisfaction with what comes of its own accord
mita-bhuk                          Regulated eating
munih                              Thoughtful
jfíjmm'MifijmMm
2^tíy5fti^^^^tí^^ffi''M^^Í^^                                                                                  3.27. Und
1/11 iipf/l~c/lYfiiinii                  T M7incT in '1 tpcliinpri nlíicp
l_ilVlllti 111 (A SCGIUUICU pidGC
sdnto                                     reacerul
tnaitrah                                 Friendly
karuna                                    Compassionate
dtmaván                                   Self-possessed/ Determined
sanubandhe ca dehe 'sminn                No bodily identitication or attraction tor bodily
akurvann asad-agraham
jitdnena drsta-tattvena                   Transcends the 3 stages of material
prakrteh purusasya ca                     consciousness and seeing the reality, by realized
nivrtta-buddhy-avastháno                 knowledge of spirit and matter.
düri-bhütánya-darsanah                   Being aloof from all other conceptions of life
dtma-drk                                 Self-realized
11. A liberated soul realizes the Supersoul whose characteristics are
(i)   asati sad-dbhdsam Manifest as a reflection even in the falsé ego
(ii)   sato handhum       Cause of prakrti
(iii)   asat-caksuh    The revealer of the material elements
(iv)    sarvánusyütam —>• Pervades into everything
(v)    advayam —» One without a second
Sun reflected on              Reflection of          Infer the presence
Sun in sky
i         water                  water on the wall               of Sun
í
Influenced hy 3- |         Reflected in hody,        Infer the presence
Pure jiva                   fold ahankára í           senses and mind                 of Jiva
Supreme                   Lord reflected in everything by His energies         infer the presence
Lord                       (understanding of the pure devotee)                     of Lord
1 4 - 1 6 : S O U L W I T H O U T MATERIAL COVERINGS
14. The soul is pure, alert and free from the falsé ego, yet he appears to he covered hy
the falsé ego and its products (senses, mind, etc).
Canto
>:fimmm{mm{mtiM
15. Although he can feel his existence vividly, he thinks that he is lost and feels
distressed (like a person who lost his wealth) with the disappearance of the falsé ego
(and its products) during deep sleep or universal destruction.
16. But when he realizes that he is pure individual soul hy mature understanding,
then the situation he accepts under falsé ego hecomes manifest to him.
17-19. [Q4a] Since prakrti and jiva are attracted to each other eternally, how is their
separation possihle? Although not the doer, he is attached to the modes and prakrti
acts on him and hinds him. Then, how is liheration possible?
20. Even if the great fear of hondage is sometimes avoided hy sánkhya (inquiry ahout
the fundamental principles), it may still reappear since its cause has not ceased.
21-23: KAPILA RECOMMENDS INTENSE PRACTICE
21-22. One can get liheration hy intense practice that includes -
•    intense bhakti for a long time (tivrayá bhaktya ciram)
•    without desire for fruitive results [animitta-nimittena)
•    hy executing prescribed duties (sva-dharmena)
•    nourishment hy hearing ahout Me (sruta-sambhrtayá)
•    perfect knowledge and detachment (jhánena,     vairágyena)
•    austerity, yoga and self-ahsorption (tapo-yuktena, yogena, dtma-samddhind)
23. By thus practicing seriously, the influence of prakrti over jiva can he removed,
just as wooden sticks that cause a fire are themselves consumed hy it.
24-2fe,TRAKRTLCANNOT HARM A N ENLK|jH|^N{Ep S O U L ^
L i n k : Kapila now answers Devahüti's question in 3.27.20 about the reappearance of
the fear.
24. By discovering the faultiness of his desiring to lord it over prakrti and hy
therefore giving it up, the jiva hecomes independent and stands in his own glory.
25. Such a person of discrimination is like an awakened person who is not affected hy
the dream.
3.27. Understanding Material Nature
26. P r a k r t i cannot harm h i m , because -
(i) He knows the Absolute Truth or the elements (vidita-tattvasya),
(ii) He has fixed his mind on Me {yunjato mayi manasam), and
(iii) Rejoices in the self {dtma-árdma).
2 7 - 3 0 : FINAL LIBERATION O F T H E Y O C Í
27. Such a yogt engages in self-realization for many life times with complete
detachment from everything.
28-29. M y devotee hecomes self-realized hy M y mercy, and attains his ultimate goal
having cut all douhts, his destined abode under M y shelter and never comes hack.
30. When his heart is no longer attracted to the hy-products of yoga, he can attain
final liheration, where death cannot overcome him.
tA*S3v¥sS*..K*A*^^
Canto 3 Overvie
'     3 . 2 8 LORD KAPILA'S INSTRUCTIONS O N " ^
T H E EXECUTION O F DEVOTIONAL SERVICE
Definitions and details of yama, 1
1-12: Limbs of                niyama, ásana, pránáyáma,      i
astaiiga-yoga              pratyáhára, dháraná, dhyána and |
samádhi
13-18: Description j
Beauty of Lord's face, eyes, hodilyi
of Lord's form for !_
features, Srívatsa, Kaustuhha,
3.28. Kapila's              performing
Pítámhara, etc
instructions                dháraná       !
on the
execution of               19-33: Dhyána, |
meditation on the I           Starting with Lotus feet and
devotional
individual limhs of '       ending with His heautiful laughter
service                   the Lord
34-38: Liheration           His detachment from everything
of yogi and his            material and achievement of real
state of mind                          identity
Yogi should see the Supersoul in 1
39-44: Thought
all heings and all heings in the
process of yogi
Supersoul
L i n k : In 3.28, Lord Kapila describes the meditation in astanga-yoga system in detail,
by which the yogi attains liheration without effort [Answer to Q 4 ] .
irt."             '"j9^áYm^i
C l 1-12:   LIMBS O F ASTÁNGA-YOGA
1 . I will describe the yoga system (bhakti-misra astdnga-yoga), the object of which is
to concentrate the mind. By foiiowing this the mind attains the joyful spiritual path.
2-4: Yama and Niyama
1.     sva-dharmdcaranam saktyd          execute prescribed duties to the best of ability
2.      vidharmdt ca nivartanam        avoid performing duties not allotted
3.      daivdt labdhena santosa       satisfied with what is achieved by Lord's grace
4.      dtmavit-carandrcanam         worshiping the lotus feet of a spiritual master
5.      grdniya-dharma-nivrttih —» cessation of conventional religious practices
6.      moksa-dharma-ratih        attracted to those which lead to salvation
7.      mita-medhyddanam         eating very frugally
8.      sasvad vivikta-ksema-sevanam         always remaining in secluded place
9.      ahirhsá   non-violence
10.     satyam —>• truthfulness
11.     asteyarh    refraining from theft
12.     yávad-artha-parigrahah       possessing only whatever is necessary
13.     brahmacaryam        celibacy
14.     tapah —>• austerity
15.     saucam     cleanliness
16.     svádhyáyah —>• study of the Vedas
17.     purusa-arcanam       worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead
18.     maunam       silence
Note: Bold points in the above list are yamas and rest are niyamas.
5-6: Ásana, Pránáyáma, Pratyáhára, Dháraná, Dhyána and Samádhi
5      Ásana            Attaining steadiness by mastering correct ásanas
Pránáyáma        Controlling the breathing of the vitai air
Pratyáhára       Withdrawing senses from material objects, concentrate mind in the heart
6      Dháraná          Fixing the prána at one spot among the various cakras by mind
Dhyána           Meditating on the limbs of the Lord and Vaikuntha-lilás
Samádhi          The state of the mind's being virtually absorbed in the Lord
7. By these or any other true processes, one must control the contaminated, unbridled
mind and fix it on the Lord.
8. Requirements for Ásana - One should practice breath control by -
(i) Controlling the mind and sitting postures
Canto 3   ^^^^^^^^^//^M
(ii) Establishing a seat in a clean place
(iii) Sitting in svastiká-asana and
(iv) Keeping the body straight
9 - 1 0 : Mind control through Pránáyáma
9. One should purify the passage for prána by the practice of inhaling (püraka),
holding [kumbhaka) and exhaling [recaka), or reversing the process, so that the mind
becomes steady.
10. Very soon the mind of such a yogi becomes pure, just as gold becomes pure tvhen
put into fire and fanned with air.
11. Effects of the practicing of -
•    Pránáyáma           destroys the dosás in the body
•    Dháraná          destroys sins
•        Pratyáhára      frees one from material association with sense objects
•    Dhyána           frees one from the modes (uncontroUable qualities)
12. When the mind becomes steady by the practice of this yoga, looking at the tip of
the nose, one should meditate on the form of the Lord.
L i n k : Meditation on the Lord's form, the 3"^ anga of the nine-limbed bhakti process
(smaranam), is the T'' anga in the astánga-yoga. In yoga, this is for attaining
liheration. Taking this opportunity, Kapila describes the Lord's form used by both
devotees and yogis for meditation.
13        prasanna-vadanámbhojarh        Cheerful, lotus like countenance
padma-garbháruneksanam         Ruddy eyes like the interior of a lotus
mlotpala-dala-syámarh         Swarthy body like petals of a blue lotus
sahkha-cakra-gadd-dharam Bears a conch, discus, mace and lotus in hands
14          lasat-pahkaja-kihjalka       Loins covered by a shining cloth, yellowish like
píta-kauseya-vásasam         lotus filaments
srivatsa-vaksasam bhrájat      Srivatsa mark (curl of white hair) on breast
kaustubhámukta-kandharam        Kaustubha gem suspended from His neck.
15          matta-dvirepha-kalayá        Garland of forest flowers humming with
paritam vana-málayá          intoxicated hees
pa rárdhya-hára-valaya-       Priceless pearl necklace, bracelets
Ölir'ÖMÍFSíMiF'S^                                                       of Devotional Service
kiritdhgada-nüpuram          Crown, armlets and anklets
16           kdhcí-gunollasac-chronim       Loins and hips encircled by a girdle
hrdaydmbhoja-vistaram          Stands on the lotus of His devotee's heart
daréamyatamarh édntarh         Most charming to look at the serene aspects
mano-nayana-vardhanam          Gladdens the eyes, mind and heart of devotees
17           apicya-darsanam sasvat         Eternally very beautiful
sarva-loka-namaskrtam          Worshipahle by all inhabitants of every planet
santam vayasi kaisore        Situated in youth and boyhood
bhrtydnugraha-kdtaram          Eager to hestow blessings upon His devotee
18          kirtanya-tirtha-yasasarh       Worth singing His glories
punya-sloka-yasaskaram         His glories enhance the glory of the devotees
dhydyed devath samagrdngathOne should meditate upon all His limbs until
ydvan na cyavate manah   the mind becomes fixed
19. With heart fiiled with pure emotions, the yogi visualizes the Lord standing,
moving, sitting or lying down, and meditates on His beautiful pastimes in the
spiritual world {dhyána).
20. Having meditated on the Lord with all His limbs, he should fix his mind on each
individual limb of the Lord.
Lord's limb      Characteristics and the Effect of meditation on it
21-        Lotus feet       • Marked with a thunderbolt, goad, banner and lotus
22                          • Splendour of beautiful ruby nails resembles orbit of moon
• Lord Siva becomes all the more blessed by bearing on his head the
boly waters that washed them (Gaitgá)
• Dispels the thick gloom of one's heart
• Act like thunderbolts on the mountain of sin in the mind
23         Jánu (Below      • Lix in heart the activities of Laksmi who is always found massaging
Knees/ calves)     the Lord's legs and thighs
24         Thighs           • Whitish blue, like the lustre of linseed flower (atasiká-kusuma)
• Appear most graceful when the Lord is on Garuda's shoulders.
• Storehouse of all energy.
Hips             • Rounded, encircled by a girdle that rests on the exquisite yellow silk
cloth that extends down to His ankles.
Canto 3 Overview   ^^^^j^MMMl^MM^^MMMMM^
25     Navel             • Moonhke; in the centre or His abdomen.
• roundation ot the entire universe ttom where lotus stem originates
containing all the different planetary systems
Nipples           • Resemble a pair or most exquisite emeralds
• Appear whitish because of the rays of the milk-white pearl necklaces
adorning His chest
• AnOíiP of Ponnp• Source of pleasure for the mind and full satisfaction for the eyes.
• Fnhíinrps fhp hpíiiitv of lCíiii*itnnhíi PPTTI on l-íi17     Arms              • Source of all nowers of demigods controllers of nature's functions
• Sudarsana cakra — 1000 spokes, dazzling lustre
• Conch looks like a swan in His lotuslike palm.
28     Kaumodaki         • Very dear to H i m
(club)            • Smashes the inimical demons, and is smeared with their blood
Mála              • Always surrounded by bumblebees, with their nice buzzing sound
(garland)
TVAani (npurl     • Renresents the nnre livinp entities who are alwavs enpaped ín His
necKiacet            Qprvi P P       L l i L . L / U l v - l l V l L l c ^ L . I 1 L 1 L 1 V . 3 VV 1 1 V 2 d L V. d l VV d y 3 L . l l { : q d C ^ L . U 1 1 1 1 1 1 3
x\.\- L 2 J L . 3 L . l i L 3
29-    Lotus face        • T3 C i V 1 GC
l'l                                       T     I                            T T ' i ' r * ^              r*             '     1     *
30                          Lotus Iike
world           of compassion Lord
out countenance;                           for anxiotis presentsdevotees    His different forms in this
• Nose is prominent
• 1       \—r"] f,., V ^nt^Llrc o i * . . 111 i i m i n .T t"..n n n T n n . n c m l l n T i m n n r l — l i c
glittering alligator-shaped
ciysLtii ciCtii                         earrings uy iiic usciiiaLioii oi inis
ciiceKa dic iiiuiiiiiiiiLcu
• Adorned with curly hair and decorated by lotuslike eyes and
dancing eyebrows. A lotus surrounded by swarming hees and a pair
of swimming tish would be put to shame by its elegance.
31     Eyes              • Soothe the most fearful threefold agonies of His devotees.
Glancé            • Accompanied by ioving smiles, are full of abundant grace.
32     Smile             • Drives away the ocean of tears caused by intense grief
32     Eyebrows          • Manifested by His internál potency in order to charm Cupid for
good of sages.
33     Laughter          • So captivating that it can be easily meditated upon.
• Small teeth resemble jasmine buds rendered rosy by the splendour of
His lips.
• Once devoting his mind to this, the yogi should no longer desire to
see anything else.
MEZ          3.28 Execution of Devotional Service
Note: All the verses in this section are sweet and worth memorizing. However, it is
not practical to reproduce all of them here, so a few vitai ones are given below. The
reader may refer the Srltnad-Bhágavatam for the complete section.
21. Meditation on the Lotus feet
sancintayed bhagavatas caranáravindam
vajránkusa-dhvaja-saroruha-ldnchanádhyam
uttunga-rakta-vilasan-nakha-cakravála-
jyotsndbhir dhata-mahad-dhrdaydndhakdram
28. Meditation on Kaumodaki, Vana-málá and Kaustubha
kaumodakim bhagavato dayitárh smareta
digdhám aráti-bhata-sonita-kardamena
mdlám madhuvrata-varütha-giropaghustárh
caityasya tattvam amalarh manim asya kanthe
31. Meditation on Glancé
tasydvalokam adhikam krpaydtighora-
tdpa-trayopasamanáya nisrstam aksnoh
snigdha-smitánugunitath vipula-prasddath
dhydyec ciram vipula-bhávanayd guhdyám
32. Meditation on Smile and Eye Brows
hasam harer avanatdkhila-loka-tivra-
sokdsru-sdgara-visosanam atyuddram
sammohandya racitam nija-máyayásya
bhrü-mandalam muni-krte makara-dhvajasya
3 4 - 3 8 : LIBERATION O F Y G G Í A N D H I S STATE O F M I N D
34. By this meditation, one gradually develops love for the Lord, exhihiting
symptoms like the hairs standing and tears rolling. Gradually, he withdraws his
hook-like mind from all material activity.
Note: Srila Visvanátha Cakravarti Thákura mentions that an unfortunate yogi, in
spite of developing love for the Lord, also withdraws his mind from His beautiful
form, because he is not fixed in that taste. Such a yogi is cheated of bhakti-rasa. The
Lord gives such a yogi the realization of pratyag-dtmá (individual soul), but not
liheration with realization of Paramátmá.
^*ás,3Ko**\.3'-y*ás3'-y*^"-'^"'>'*ás3'~*'*ás^^^
Canto 3 Overview
•
L i n k [3.27.17-20]   [3.28.35-39]: Lord Kapila continues to respond to Devahüti's
question about how the soul is bound and freed.
35. The mind thus detached from material contamination is like the flame of a lamp,
and is actually dovetailed with that of the Supreme Lord, as it is freed from the flow
of material qualities. (Material mind destroyed)
36. Then that detached mind becomes situated in its own glory, transcendental to all
happiness and distress. The yogi realizes the truth of his relationship with the Lord
and discovers that pleasure and pain are actually due to the falsé ego. (Soul devoid of
material coverings)
37. Because he achieved his real identity, he acts as if totally unaware of his body,
like a drunken person.
38. The body of such a liberated yogi is taken charge of by the Lord, and its functions
continue until its destined activities are finished. He does not accept the by-products
of the material body as his own and it appears like a body within a dream.
3 9 - 4 2 : UNDERSTANDING O F T H E Y O G Í
39. Just as a person is different from his son and wealth, though he identifies with
them, the jiva is different from his body. Liberated soul can understand this.
40-41. Just as fire is different from wood, sparks and smoke etc, Bhagaván is also
different from the jiva combined with the senses, the five elements and consciousness.
42. Such a yogi should see the Supersoul in all beings and all beings in the Supersoul.
43. Just as fire appears different in different forms of wood, under different
conditions of the modes, the pure spirit soul manifests itself in different bodies.
44. After conquering insurmountable maya the yogi can be in the self-realized
position.
*r*T             3.29 Explanation Of Devotional Service
3 . 2 9 EXPLANATION O F
DEVOTIONAL SERVICE BY LORD KAPILA
Asked about more details of bhakti
(Q5), nature of the time (Q6), and
1-6: Devahüti's
further questions                 cycie of birth and death (Q7).
Glorified Kapila
8-10: Performers of bhaktiin three I
modes
11-14:Characteristics of pure bhakti
7-20: Kapila
beyond three modes
described various
classes of bhakti
15-18: Angas of bhakti, for the
(Answer to Q5)
purification of the mind
3.29.                                            19-20: Practice of these aiigas of
bhakti gives rise to pure bhakti
Explanation of
devotional
21-24: if one neglects or disregards
service by Lord                                        Me present in all jivas, hates or
Kapila        21-27: Offenses are              criticises others, his deity worship is
obstacles in bhakti            an imitation, like oblations into ashes.
and it's solution
J          25-27: Solution - Perform duties and
worship the deity until one realize the
presence of the Lord in all
28-32: Different gradation in the jivas
starting from inanimate objects to
28-34: Gradation in
pure devotee
jivas
33-34: Best is the person who has no
35-45: Nature of                   interest outside of the Lord
Time (Answer to Q6)
Link: Having heard about Sdnkhya (in 3.26-27) and yoga (in 3.28), Devahüti again
desires to hear about bhakti with its different types, since she should perform that
process. In 3.29, Lord Kapila describes bhakti affected by the gunas and pure bhakti,
as well as giving respect to living beings and the power of time.
2-4: Devahuti's Questions                                               Answered in
Q5     Explain in detail the path of bhakti, which is the root cause of         3.29.7-34
the knowledge of Sahkhya and the ultimate end of all
philosophical systems. (3.29.1-2)
Q6     Describe about the nature of time by whose fear, peopie perform          3.29.35-45
pious acts. (3.29.4)
Q7    Describe about the continual process of birth and death of the             3.30-32
jivas, hearing which one becomes detached. (3.29.3)
5. Devahüti glorifies Kapila - Y o u are yoga-bháskara, the sun of the system of all
yogas, who gives illumination to those who are - (i) deluded by falsé ego, (ii) blind,
(iii) sleeping in darkness, (iv) without shelter and (iv) fatigued due to material
attachment.
6. Pleased with His mother's words. Lord Kapila started to respond with compassion.
L i n k : Kapila has already spoken of pure bhakti beyond the material modes in 3.25.32.
Now Kapila begins to speak about bhakti which is contaminated by the gunas.
J-20:   VARIOUS CLASSES O F BHAKTI
7. There are many paths of bhakti in terms of the different qualities of the performer.
8-10: Performers of bhakti in three modes
Mode          Performer of Bhakti                 Separatist mentality
8    Ignorance     Intentions of envy, violence,       Bhinna-drk - devoid of compassion
(tamasic)     pride and anger.
9    Passión       Desires for material enjoyment,     Prthak-bhdvah - desires for objects
(rájasic)     fame and opulence.                  other than Lord
10   Goodness      Desires to free himself from      Prthak-bhdvah - desires for
(sattvic)     karma, offers results to Lord and liheration
worships the Lord as a duty.
* ? * í í ' Í S H Í Í *A*1(1Í * A * Í ( Í Í A * 1 ( Í C     3-29 Explanation Of Devotional Service       •
Note: Bhakti doesn't become tamasic, rájasic or sattvic, but the performer of bhakti is
with such qualities.
11-14:    Characteristics of Pure hhakti heyond modes
Note: The qualities of pure bhakti mentioned in 3.25.32 are mentioned here again for
easy understanding.
11-12. Unadulterated devotional service - By hearing about M y qualities mind
flows continuously to Me unobstructed, just as the Ganges flows to the ocean. Such
bhakti is causeless and uninterrupted.
mad-guna-sruti-mdtrena mayi sarva-guhdsaye
mano-gatir avicchinnd yathd gangdmbhaso 'mbudhau
laksanam bhakti-yogasya nirgunasya hy uddhrtam
ahaituky avyavahitd yd bhaktih purusottame
L i n k : Kapila explains the lack of material desire in pure devotees, by kaimutya-nydya
(as illustrated by the example of Ganges) - devotees do not accept even spiritual
benedictions, what to speak of accepting material things!
13. Devotees reject liheration without service - M y devotees do not accept the five
kinds of liheration, even when I offer them, unless it involves service to Me.
sdlokya-sdrsti-sdmipya- sdrüpyaikatvam apy uta
dtyamdnarh na grhnanti vind mat-sevanam jandh
L i n k : Then why do they perform bhakti? - because it gives the highest result
14. The highest state of existence is called bhakti, by which one -
(i) surpasses the three gunas (a by-product only) and
(ii) is situated in the transcendental stage iike Me or attain premd directed to Me
sa eva bhakti-yogdkhya dtyantika uddhrtah
yendtivrajya tri-gunam mad-bhdvdyopapadyate
L i n k 11 -> (15-19]: In 3.29.II, Kapila explained that simply by hearing of His name,
quality, etc, one is immediately attracted. That stage is attained by foiiowing the
below mentioned components of bhakti, as confirmed in 3.29.19.
15      i     Executing prescribed duties (svadharma) without material profit
ii    Regularly performing one's devotional activities, without excessive violence
16     iii    Seeing, touching, worshipping, praying and offering obeisance to the deity
iv    Seeing with detachment and with patience, every living entity as spiritual
Canto 3 Overview
17. Qualities of madhyama-adhikán
V      Respecting the spiritual master and the acaryas {mahatarh bahu-mánena)
vi      Showing compassion to the unfortunate (dtnándm anukampayá)
vii     Being friendly to one's equals (maitryá caivdtma-tulyesu)
viii    Executing all activities with regulation and sense control (yamena niyamena)
18    ix      Hearing about spirituál matters (ddhydtmikdnusravandt)
X      Chanting the Lord's boly names (ndma-sankirtaná)
xi      Straight forward behaviour (árjavena)
xii     Associating with saintly persons (drya-sangena)
xiii     Giving up falsé ego (nirahankriyayd)
19-20: Practice of these aiigas of hhakti gives rise to pure hhakti
19. Being thus purified by the above processes (15-18), the mind of such a devotee is
immediately attracted simply by hearing M y name or qualities.
20. Just as air carries an aroma from its source to the nose, bhakti carries one's mind
to the Supreme Lord.
L i n k : In the practice of bhakti, offense creates restriction. Offense generally stems
from disrespect to great devotees. In order to avoid offense to them, one must respect
all living entities. Now, Kapila scolds, out of affection, to benefit and teach His
devotees who do not respect all beings.
21 -27: OvERCOMiNG OBSTACLES IN BHAKTI D U E T O OFFENSES
21-24: Offenses in hhakti due to disregard, hatred and criticism
21-22. Disregard - I am present in the heart of every living being as the Supersoul. If
an ignorant person neglects or disregards (avajhdya) Me in all beings, his worship of
the deity is simply an imitation and is like offering oblations into ashes.
yo mdrh sarvesu bhütesu santam dtmdnam isvaram
hitvárcdm bhajate maudhydd bhasmany eva juhoti sah
23. Hatred - The mind of such a separatist who worships Me hut hates (dvisatah)
other heings does not attain peace.
24. Criticism - I am not pleased with such a person who criticizes other heings
(avamdninah) even if he worships with proper rituals and paraphernalia.
3.29 Explanation Of Devotional Service
aham uccavacair dravyaih kriyayotpannayanaghe
naiva tusye 'rcito 'rcdyám bhüta-grámávamáninah
25-27: Solution - Realize the presence of the Lord in everyone
25. Until one realizes M y presence in his own heart and in the hearts of others, one
should perform his prescrihed duties and worship M y deity.
26. In the form of death, I give fear to those who see differences hetween themselves
and other living entities.
27. Therefore, through charity, respect, friendly hehavior and equal vision, one
should propitiate Me, who ahides in all as their very Self.
L i n k : But having equal vision does not mean that the devotee loses discrimination
based on gradations in the jivas. [One should have discrimination when to behave
friendly and when to give charity, etc.]
2 8 - 3 4 : GRADATION                   VAS
\
Inanimate
Living 1
Entities with i       Entities with           Entities 1        Beings with
immovable i         greater life           developed             with sense            touch
objects
entities           symptoms j           consciousness !        perception        ^ sensation
Entities with       Beings who                                   Beings with \      Beings with
Beings with                                               Beings who
two sets of         distinguish                                   sense of |           taste
many legs                                                 can hear
teeth              forms                                        smell            sensation
Animals         Humans                Non-     I                            r                       Brahmana
Humans in
with four       with two           Varnás'rama i                                Bráhmanas          who knows
Varnásrama
legs           legs               humans i                                                         Vedas J
Bráhmana who                                              Bráhmana who |
Pure            Liberated                                          Brahmana who
also follows his                                          knows meaning
devotee           person                                           can dispel doubts
duties                                                  of Vedas
Note: Entries in bold indicate a subcategory.
33. Best is the person who has no interest outside of Me and who therefore engages
and dedicates all his activities and life - everything - unto Me without cessation.
34. Such a person offers great respect to all living entities thinking that the Lord has
entered all their bodies as the Supersoul.
I    Canto 3 Overview      ^/jjj^^^M^^^M^S^J
i
35. Kapila conciudes - I have described to you ahout bhakti-yoga and astánga-yoga
and hy practicing which, a person can attain the Supreme Lord (purusa) as Bhagaván
or as impersonal Brahman respectively.
36. This purusa whom the jiva must approach is the eternal form of Bhagaván, who
is known as Brahman and Paramátmá. He is the transcendental chief personality, and
His activities are all spiritual.
L i n k : Noíc Kapila answers Devahüti's question in 3.29.4 (Q6) about the time factor.
37-45: CHARACTERISTICS O F TIME
37     /     Causes transformation of various material manifestations
ii    Another feature of the Supreme Lord - one who doesn't know this is afraid
of time factor (bhinna-drsdrh bhayam)
38    iii    Shelter of everyone (akhilásrayah)
iv     Enters everyone's hearts
V     Master of all masters (kalayatdrh prabhuh)
vi     Causes every being to be annihilated by another
39    vii    Holds no one dear - no one is enemy or friend
viii   Gives inspiration to those who have not forgottén Him and destroys those
who have forgottén
40-44: Due to fear / order of time...
40    ix     All demigods controlling nature perform their functions
41     X     All trees and creepers produce fruits and flowers in the proper season
42    xi     Rivers flow, oceans do not overflow, fire burns and the earth does not sink
43    xii    Sky provides space and accommodates all planets
xiii   Universal body expands with its seven coverings
44    xiv    Gunávatáras carry out creation, maintenance and destruction
45    XV     Time is unchanging (avyayah)
xvi     Without heginning (anádi), but causes everyone's birth (ádi-krt)
xvii    Without end (anantah), but causes everyone's end (anta karah), by death
xviii Dissolves the universe by destroying even the lord of death, Yamarája.
3.30 Adverse Fruitive Activities
3 . 3 0 DESCRIPTION BY LORD KAPILA
O F ADVERSE FRUITIVE ACTIVITIES
\A:
1-3: Power of time - destroys everything
that he acquires leading him to
lamentation
4-5: He finds a particular satisfaction in
any kind of species, even in hell
6 & 8: Impetus for family life - deep-
rooted attraction for family, especially
1-18: Life and
w o m e n and children
death of a
materialist      7 & 9-10: Constant anxiety to maintain
J     family —• commits violence - * goes to
hell
11-13: Unsuccessful in maintaining
30.                                  family    desiring other's wealth —»
Description                               failures   disrespect from family
by Lord
14-18: Old age       disease       death
Kapila of
adverse                                  19: Passes stool and urine seeing
fruitive                                            Yamadütas
activities
20-23: O n the w a y to hell - bitten by
dogs    hunger, thirst     falls in fatigue
—» passes 99,000 yojanas
—
24-28: Undergoes various hellish          |
19-34: His post]                punishments                      1
death
experience        2 9 : Sometimes hellish punishments are
visihle in earth also
30-33: W h o goes to hell? - one w h o
maintains oneself and family hy sinful
means (Andha-támisra)
34: Hell     lower hirths —» humán hirth
mjrnimü^iimMBmMmimmmm^j
Canto 3 Overview
•mMmmmMijmMm
L i n k : So far Lord Kapila has explained bhakti mixed with gunas, pure bhakti, jnána
and astánga-yoga to his mother. In 3.30-32, He answers Devahüti's question (Q7
asked in 3.29.3) about the birth and death of a living entity, by describing, one after
another, the results arising from the activities of tamás, rajas and sattva. In 3.30,
Kapila explains the pains in youth, old age, death and hell for the persons agitated by
attachment to wife and sons.
1 - 1 8 : LIFE A N D DEATH O F A MATERIALIST
1 . A materialist does not know the power of time hy which he is heing carried
away, just as the clouds do not know the power of wind.
2. Whatever he has acquired with great pain and lahor for his pleasure is destroyed
by time, and he laments for that.
3. H e laments because, under ignorance, he has accepted temporary things related to
this hody like home, land, wealth, etc. as permanent.
4. He finds a particular type of satisfaction i n whatever species he takes hirth in,
and therefore is never averse to such a condition.
5. Bewildered hy maya, he feels little inclined to give up his body, even when in
hell, for he takes delight in hellish enjoyment.
6. Such satisfaction is due to one's deep-rooted attraction for hody, wife, children,
home, animals, wealth and friends, which make him feel quite perfect.
atma-jaya-sutagara- pasu-dravina-bandhusu
nirüdha-müla-hrdaya  átmánarh bahu manyate
7. Although hurning with anxiety, he always performs sinful acts to maintain his so-
called family, with a hope that is never fulfilled.
8. H i s impetus for family life - With heart and senses, charmed with illusion hy the
words of a woman, he enjoys solitary emhraces with her, and is enchanted hy the
sweet words of his small children.
9. He remains in family life, which is full of diplomacy and politics. If he can
successfuily counteract miseries, he thinks himself happy.
grhesu kuta-dharmesu duhkha-tantresv atandritah
kurván duhkha-pratikáram sukhavan manyate grhi
10. Securing money hy committing violence, he maintains his family, although he
only gets to eat their remnants. By this process he goes to hell, after dying.
ímfiMmM€mM:mM€mM€iiM
mtim3                                3.30 Adverse Fruitive Activities
mm'
L i n k : Is he at least successful in maintaining them? No.
11. "When he suffers reverses in his occupation, he repeatedly tries to improve, but
when he fails in his attempts, he starts desiring others' wealth.
12. Thus, unsuccessful i n maintaining his family memhers, he is hereft of all heauty
or wealth. He always thinks of his failure, grieving very deeply.
13. Because he is not ahle to maintain them, his family memhers do not respect him
as hefore. He is treated like an old and worn-out ox.
14. He still does not hecome averse to family life. Deformed hy old age, he prepares
for death.
15. Thus, he remains at home like a pet dog and eats whatever is negligently given to
him. Afflicted with many diseases, he loses his appetite, eats little and cannot work.
16. Diseased condition - His eyes hulge out, his glands hecome congested with
mucus, he coughs and hreaths with difficulty and his throat rattles with a sound like
"ghura-ghura."
17. Final stages - He lies down, surrounded hy lamenting relatives and, although he
wants to, can no longer speak, heing under the control of time.
18. He finally dies in grief, most pathetically, in great pain, without consciousness
and seeing his relatives crying.
19-34: H I S POST DEATH EXPERIENCE
19. At death, seeing two angry and terrihle looking Yamadutas, he passes stool and
urine in great fear.
20-23: His experiences on the way to hell
20. The Yamadütas arrest him and drag him down a long road. They tie a rope
around his neck and put him in a hody suitahle for punishment.
21. His heart hroken hy their threats, he tremhles and is hitten hy dogs on the path.
In great pain, he rememhers his sins.
22. Afflicted hy hunger and thirst, he has to pass along roads of hot sand with forest
fires on hoth sides, heing whipped on his hack and with no place to rest.
23. He falls down in fatigue and faints sometimes, hut is forced to rise again. Thus he
is hrought to the presence of Yamarája.
24. After travelling 99,000 yojanas within two or three muhürtas, he finally receives
the punishment he is destined to suffer.
mmmMBMmiwfiMm.^miMmmm
I      Canto 3 Overview              ^US^éV't%'áí%Wéf'&'ií^^^
W                         W^tKi \^oL--Lfol'Zc:^..^Zo--~'£^
25-28: Experience in Hell
25. Surrounded by hurning wood, his limhs are set on fire. Sometimes, he is made to
eat his own flesh, or have it eaten hy others.
26. While he is still alive, his entrails are pulled out hy dogs and vultures. He is
tortured hy the hites of serpents, scorpions, etc.
27. Next his limhs are lopped off and torn apart hy elephants. He is hurled from
hilltops and is held captive, either in water or in a cave.
28. Because of their sinful association men and women experience many kinds of
miserahle conditions in the hells known as támisra, andha-támisra and raurava.
29. Even in this world, hell and heaven are sometimes experienced.
30-33: Who goes to hell?
30-31. One who maintains himself and his family hy sinful means, and who acquires
money hy violence to others, will suffer hellish life after death. The money acquired
in that way is the passage money hy which he leaves this world.
32-33. By the arrangement of the Lord (or karma), one who maintains his family hy
sinful means suffers in the hell called andha-támisra.
34. After going through all these miserahle hellish conditions, and then many hirths
in the lower forms, he becomes purified and is reborn as a humán being.
•%mmmímii)}                                    3.31 Movements Of The Living Entities
3 . 3 1 LORD KAPILA'S INSTRUCTIONS O N
T H E MOVEMENTS O F T H E LIVING ENTITIES
1-11: Jiva's                 1-4: Stages of development of embryo
entrance,
growth and                5-11: Sufferings within the womb - worm hites,
eating wrong food by mother etc.
sufferings in the
womb                12-14: i take shelter of Him. Although He is with
me, He is unaffected.
/       15-16: By His mercy I got bhakti, so I worship
Him only.
12-21: Prayers
hy devotee jiva
17: Suffering here is intolerahíe, want to get out
within the
womb
18-19: By Your mercy i am awakened to
consciousness
3.31. Lord                          . v^
20-21: Don't take me out, I will deliver myself
Kapila's                                  with my intelligence by surrendering unto You.
instructions
22-27: Deprived of memory, smeared with stool
on the
and blood, lies on a foul bed infested with sweat
movements       22-31: Suffering!          and germs, bitten by many creatures, cries
of the living   of the jiva after!                             bitterly.
he comes out
entities                                    28-31: Even in boyhood he suffers due to
of the womh
hankering and lamentation. He continues
activities that bind him again.
32-34: Avoid had association of sinful peopie
who are dancing dogs in the hands of women.
32-48: Effects
of had                35-42: Be aware of opposite sex. Even Brahmá
association            got attracted, only Náráyana could resist, it kicks
even great kings and is the gateway to hell. For
woman, man is máyá.
J
44-46: Death: End of reaction of an activity.
43-48:                         Birth: Beginning of a reaction
Understanding
Birth and Death i "X,] 47-48: Live with right vision, reason, devotion
'      ;               and detachment
Canto 3 Overview
¥M{mmmm:m]imi
L i n k : Now Kapila explains how a jiva, after attaining the humán form undergoes
great pains in the womb, during birth, as an infant and as a child. He also describes
the bhakti of the jiva as he prays in the womb.
1. Under the Lord's supervision, according to his karma, the jiva is made to enter into
a woman's womb through the partiele of male semen, for assuming a particular type
of hody.
karmand daiva-netrena jantur dehopapattaye
striyáh pravista udaram purhso retah-kandsrayah
2-4: Development of the embryo from day 1 to 6 months
iDuration    Development of Embryc
U night     The sperm and ovum mix
2    S'Xight     The mixture ferments into a bubhle
10"' day    Develops into a form like a plum and then as a lump of flesh or an egg
1'' mouth   Head
3    2"" month   Hands, feet and other limbs develop
3'" month   Nails, fingers, toes, body hair, hones and skin, and other apertures
namely the eyes, nostrils, ears, mouth and anus develop
4 * month   Seven dhátus develop - chyle, hlood, flesh, fat, hone, marrow, semen
4    5 * month   Hunger and thirst develop
6'^ month Lnclosed by the amnion (a thin membráné), the male child moves on the
right side of the abdomen
10 7* month       Development of consciousness
Note: Refer to Special Verses section, page no. 224 for a detailed tahle.
5 - 1 1 : Sufferings of the child within the womb
5. Deriving its nutrition from the food and drink taken hy the mother, the fetus
grows and remains in that ahominahle residence, which is the hreeding place of other
worms.
6. Worms hite the tender hody of the child repeatedly, due to which he hecomes
unconscious moment after moment.
rtí77V'irti^iV''irti*i
3.31 Movements Of The Living Entities
7. Owing to the mother's eating hitter, pungent, hot, salty, dry or sour foods, the
hody of the child suffers pains which are intolerahíe.
8. Unahle to move hecause of the covering of the amnion and the intestines, the child
remains lying on one side of the ahdomen, his head turnéd towards his helly and his
hack and neck arched like a how.
9. The child is not free to move. If he is fortunate, he rememhers his actions in the
past hundred hirths, and grieves. What is the possihility of peace of mind in that
condition?
10. From the seventh month he attains consciousness. At that time the süti-vdta
hecomes active and tosses the child downwards. Like the worms horn of the same
womh (sodara), he cannot remain in one place.
11. The jiva, frightened and pleading, offers prayers to the Lord, who has put him in
that condition.
Note: The prayers of the jiva in the womb as mentioned here do not indicate that
every bound up jiva prays in this manner. Only a jiva who is a devotee prays like this.
JjjjjjjjjjjjP"^^
12. I take shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord (Krsna), who appears in His various
eternal forms, who walks on the earth and who awards fearlessness. Being sinful, I
got this situation from H i m .
13. I am lying in the womb due to mdyd, hut He is also here with me hut is
unaffected and changeless. Although unlimited. He is perceived in the repentant
heart.
14. I am in this material hody made of five elements, although I am essentially
spiritual. But He is transcendental to material nature and the living entities.
15. H o w can a person, deeply afflicted hy sarhsdra, again engage in the Ioving service
of the Lord, without His or H i s devotees' mercy?
16. Who else hut the Paramátmá, residing in all heings through all phases of time can
give this knowledge to a person like me? Therefore, we should surrender unto H i m
only to destroy our miseries.
17. The foolish jiva, tortured inside the womh of his mother, and desiring to get out,
counts the months and prays: 'Oh Lord! When will I get out from this confinement?'
L i n k : Lord - "Am I merciless since I do not get you out right now?" With shame,
fear, biting his tongue, putting himself in a humble position, the jiva speaks:
'rtVc53.vWv.5'j^**\c53..^**v.3'j^**Vc53.t^Canto 3 Overview                                  t«*
18. By Your causeless mercy I am awakened to consciousness, although I am only ten
months old. I cannot repay this mercy, hut can only pray with földed hands.
19. The jiva in another type of hody sees only hy instinct. But I have a humán hody in
which I can control my senses and can understand my destination. By the Supreme
Lord's grace I can see H i m within and without.
L i n k : Lord - "You choose Me by bhakti, but you are agitated by suffering. Because
you requested to get out, I will now take you out of the womb."
20. Though I am suffering here inside the womh, I do not desire to get out of this
place, hecause the place outside is under the control of deva-máyá who hewilders the
jiva and perpetuates his sarhsdra.
L i n k : Lord - "So what have you decided?"
21. Therefore, I will stay here and destroy my sufferings with the help of my friend,
clear consciousness, to surrender unto Y o u . By keeping visnu-pdda in my mind, I will
not take hirth again.
22. The ten-month-old living entity (the wise jiva) has these desires even while in the
womh. But, the air causing childhirth (süti-mdruta) suddenly propels him forth with
his face turnéd downward so that he may he horn.
23. He comes out upside down with great difficulty, hreathless and deprived of
memory due to severe agony.
24. He falls on the ground, smeared with stool and hlood and plays just like a worm
germinated from the stool. Thus he enters into ignorance.
25. After that, peopie do not understand his desires and put him into more miseries.
26. Laid down on a foul hed infested with sweat and germs, he is not ahle to -
scratch his limhs, sit, stand or move.
27. In his heipiess condition, gnats, mosquitoes, hugs and other germs hite the hahy,
whose skin is tender, just as smaller worms hite a higger worm. Deprived of wisdom
the child cries hitterly.
28-29:   Even in boyhood he suffers
28. In this way, he passes through distressful infancy and attains hoyhood. In
hoyhood he also suffers when his desires are not achieved, and thus, due to
ignorance, he hecomes angry and sorry.
rTríií Ööíí   ÖHIIÍ       (jí *?*ÍÍ Í   A I F    3.31 Movements Of The Living Entities
29. With the growth of the hody, he increases his falsé prestige and anger and
therehy creates enmity towards similarly lusty peopie.
30. Accepting the impermanent as permanent, such a foolish jíva constantly thinks in
terms of " 1 " and "mine."
31. Suhsequently, he performs actions for the sake of his hody and hecomes further
implicated hy reactions.
3 2 - 4 8 : EFFECTS O F BAD ASSOCIATION
32. If that jiva again enters the path of unrighteousness, associating with sinful
peopie in order to satisfy his stomach and genitals, he again enters hell, as hefore.
33. In had association, he loses all good qualities - truthfulness, cleanliness, mercy,
gravity, intelligence, shyness, austerity, fame, forgiveness, control of mind and senses.
satyam saucam dayá maunam buddhih srir hrir yasah ksamd
samo damo bhagas ceti yat-sangdd ydti sanksayam
34. What is bad association? - One should not associate with a coarse fool who is
hereft of the knowledge of self-realization and who is no more than a dancing dog in
the hands of a woman.
35-42:   Beware of the opposite sex
35. The infatuation and hondage which accrue to a man from attachment to any
other ohject is not as complete as that resulting from attachment to a woman (yosit-
sangdd) or to the fellowship of men who are fond of women [tat-sangi-sangatah).
na tathdsya bhaven moho bandhas cdnya-prasangatah
yosit-sangdd yathd purhso yathd tat-sahgi-sahgatah
36. Even Brahmá got attracted to his own daughter and tan up to her in the form of
a stag when she took the form of a hind.
37. Amongst all living entities hegotten hy Brahmá, none hut the sage Náráyana is
immuné to the attraction of mdyd in the form of a woman. [OR - Amongst those
who do not worship Náráyana, no one is spared hy mdyd in the form of a woman.]
tat-srsta-srsta-srstesu ko nv akhandita-dhih pumdn
rsirh ndrdyanam rte yosin-mayyeha mdyayd
38. Just try to understand the mighty strength of M y mdyd. I n the shape of a woman,
she even kicks great kings into suhmission hy the mere movement of her eyehrows.
balarh me pasya mdydydh stri-mayyd jayino disdm
yd karoti paddkrdntdn bhrüvi-jrmbhena kevalam
mmiwmmfimmiimiMmmm^miji
canto 3 Overview    ^I^J^lM^ŰMj^^Í^J^M^^^MM
39. Even great devotees and jndnis should avoid the association of woman, who is
declared in the scriptures to he the gateway to hell for the advancing devotee.
40. One who associates with máyá in the form of a woman hy accepting services
must certainly know that this is the way of death, just like a hlind well covered with
grass.
L i n k : Just as woman is a cause of problems for the man, man is a cause of problems
for a woman.
41. A living entity who, attaining the hody of a woman from thinking of women at
the point of death, foolishly looks upon mdyd in the form of a man, her hushand, as
the hestower of wealth, progeny, house and other material assets.
42. Family as arrangement for death - A woman should therefore consider her
hushand, children and house to he the arrangement of the mdyd for her death, just as
the sweet singing of the hunter is death for the deer.
43. Jiva's transmigration is due to fruitive acts - Such a jiva wanders from earth to
other planets to enjoy or suffer his karma-phala.
44- 46: What is birth and death?
44.      Death - End of the reaction of a jiva's particular activity.
B i r t h - Beginning of a particular type of reaction.
45- 46. Death - When the physical hody, the place where perception of ohjects
occurs, is rendered incapahle of perceiving.
B i r t h - When one hegins to view the physical hody as one's very self.
Example: When the eyeballs (gross matter) are unahle to see objects due to eye
disease, then the eye sense organ (subtle) also cannot see. When both the gross organ
and the subtle organ are incapahle, then the seer becomes incapahle of acting as a
seer.
47.      Don'ts - Because there is no real hirth and death one should not he horrified,
miserahle, or eager to enjoy in the world.
Do's - Understanding real nature, one should move ahout in the world free
from attachment and steadfast in purpose.
48. Endowed with proper vision, reason, devotional service and detachment^ one
should move ahout in this world made of mdyd without attachment to the hody.
3 . 3 2 ENTANGLEMENT IN FRUITIVE ACTIVITIES
1-2: Perform dharma to attain artha and káma,
1-4: Attached               averse to bhakti, worship pitrs and devas
Workers               3-4: They go to moon planet and return back to]
earth
5-6: Execute sva-dharma with detachment...
5-7: Detached
workers              7: Travel through the path of sun and attain the
Lord.
• 8-10: Remain in Satyaloka tilí the lite-time ot
8-15:                    Brahmá and get liberated with him.
Hiranyagarbha
worshippers            11-15: Liberation is not possible without bhakti,
so better perform bhakti
16-19: Minds absorbed in family attairs in
16-21: Lord                passión, they worship toretathers and are
Kapila criticizes                      averse to hari-kathá
3.32.      Sakáma Karma               20-21: They go to Pitrioka and return to the
Entangle-                                                 earth
ment ín
22-23: Jnána and vairágya, is quickly achieved
Fruitive       22-26: By                          hy practice ot bhakti
Activities   hhakti, goals ot [
other paths are                  24-25: Symptoms ot a devotee
also achieved              26: One Bhagaván is perceived ditterently
through different processes
27-31: Lord           ^ 27: Detachment is common to all practitioners.!
Kapila speaks on     Jhána          ^^"^     28-30: Lord is the source ot everything
32-36: Various
paths, ultimateiy         The one Lord is perceived ditterently through
to realize                     different scriptural practices
Bhagaván
37-43:
Qualitication to          Unqualitied peopie, qualified peopie and phaia-
receive this                                  s'ruti
knowledge
üánto 3 Overview           H^^H^i'
L i n k : In 3.32, Lord Kapila speaks about returning to this world by sakama-karma and
not returning to this world by niskdma-karma, and criticizes nondevotees. Also
having explained the results of condemned sinful activities, now Kapila explains the
results of prescribed activities with material desire.
1 - 4 : ATTACHED WORKERS (PRACTITIONERS O F SAKÁMA KARMA)
C A N N O T ATTAIN LIBERATION
1 . A grhamedht (attached worker) performs dharma for enjoying artha and kdma,
and afrer enjoying them; he acts the same way again and again.
2. Such a person is averse to bhakti, but worships the devatás and pitrs with full
faith.
3. As a result, he is elevated to the moon, where he drinks soma juice, and then
returns back to earth.
4. All the planets attained hy such a grhamedht are destroyed when the Lord goes to
His hed of serpents, Ananta Sesa, at the end of the day of Brahmá.
5 - 7 : DETACHED WORKERS (PRACTITIONERS O F NISKÁMA-KARMA)
C A N ATTAIN T H E L O R D
iiiiiii   •inimliii   iimiriwiiiwfirijiiiBiiiiiiiiiiiii«r miii»». i m m w -   aiiitKlitlWi
5-6. But more intelligent peopie execute svadharma with detachment (nihsanga,
nivrtti-dharma), and do not desire the fruits of their actions hut offer them to the
Lord (nyasta-karmdnah). They are peaceful (prasdntdh) and pure in consciousness
(suddha-cetasah), without a sense of ptoptietotship (nirmamd) ot falsé egoism
(nirahankrtdh)
7. Such peopie travel through the path of the sun (sürya-dvdrena) and attain the
Lord.
A N D SUPERIORITY O F BHAKTI
8-9. The Hiranyagarbha wotshipets remain in material world (Satyaloka) till the end
of Brahmá's lifetime (dvi-pardrdha), when Brahma gives up his hody and goes to the
Lord (enters into Mahá-Visnu).
ÍAI         3.32 Entanglement In Fruitive Activities
10. Those detached yogis, hy the practice of hreathing exercises etc, reach Brahmá's
planet. After giving up their hodies, they enter the hody of Brahmá and get lihetated
along with Brahma.
Note A: Srila Visvanátha Cakravarti Thákura explains that if the Hiranyagarbha
worshipers worship only Brahmá, but do not have bhakti for Lord Visnu, they will
not attain liheration at the end of Brahmá's life. They mérge into the body of Mahá-
Visnu along with Brahmá, but when the universes are created again, they enter into
the universe.
Note B: Although Brahmá becomes liberated, he cannot liberate his devotees. Only
the Supreme Lord can liberate one from the clutches of máyá.
L i n k : Since without bhakti, no one can become liberated, better perform bhakti.
11. Therefore, O mother, take direct shelter of the Lord, who is seated in everyone's
heart.
12-15. Even Brahmá, the Kumáras and other exalted personalities don't get lihetated
if they have bheda-drsti (independent vision or a mentality of heing the doers and
heing independent of the Supreme Lord). Though they attain Mahá-Visnu they will
come hack in their same forms and positions in the next creation.
L i n k : Because of their absence of bhakti, Brahmá and others return to the place where
peopie perform sakama-karma.
WKE               1 6 - 2 1 : L O R D KAPILA CRITICIZES SAKÁMA-KARMA
16. With their minds attached to this world, the materialistic peopie perfectly
perform their prescrihed duties with attachment to fruitive results.
17. Tormented hy passión and with their minds ahsorhed in Household affairs, they
worship the forefathers.
18-19. They are interested only in dharma, artha and káma and averse to hari-kathá,
thus are compared to stool-eating hogs and are attached to asat-gáthd.
20-21. Perfectly performing their prescrihed duties from hirth until death, they go to
Pitrioka. After their pious credits are exhausted, they fali hack down to earth.
L i n k : After describing those who are dedicated to nivrtta-karma (5-7), Kapila advised
to surrender to the Lord in 3.32.11. After describing those dedicated to pravrtta-karma
(16-21), Kapila again advises to just worship the Supreme Lord with devotion.
I       Canto 3 Overview         M^tV&^tÍ'&^éÍ'&'t^^^^^
(CONCLUSION OF LORD KAPILA'S TEACHINGS)              ^ ^ ^ ^ ^
22. Therefore, with full attention you should worship the Lord, whose attractive
lotus feet are worth worshipping. Accept this with all devotion and love.
tasmát tvam sarva-bhávena         bhajasva paramesthinam
tad-gundsrayayá  bhaktyd         bhajaniya-paddmbujam
23. B h a k t i unto Lord Vásudeva makes one advance in knowiedge {jndna)                       and
detachment (vairdgya), as well as in self-realization.
vdsudeve bhagavati bhakti-yogah prayojitah
janayaty dsu vairdgyam jndnam yad brahma-darsanam
lA-15. Symptoms of such a devotee -
•   Equipoised in sensory activities and vision
•   Transcendental to good and had, superior and inferior
•   By his transcendental intelligence, he sees himself uncontaminated by matter
•   Elevated to transcendental platform (padam) equal in qualities with the Lord.
L i n k [22-23] —> 26: In 3.32.22-23, Kapila said that all the results of bhakti, jndna and
yoga are achieved by performing bhakti alone. How is that?
26. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Bhagavan, is one, but He appears
differently as Brahman, Paramátma or purusa-avatdra, according to the different
processes foUowed by various practitioners.
jhdna-mdtram páram brahma paramdtmesvarah pumdn
drsy-ddibhih prthag bhdvair bhagavdn eka iyate
Note: Because Bhagavan contains both Brahman and Paramátma, the realization of
Bhagaván by bhakti includes the realizations of Paramátma and Brahman. On the
other hand, by practicing jndna for Brahman or yoga for Paramátmá, one does not
attain the position of an associate of the Lord, for this is nowhere stated in scriptures.
2 7 - 3 1 : L O R D KAPILA SPEAKS O N JNÁN?^^||||||||^||||||||||^^
27. There is one common requirement for all yoga practitioners to achieve their
respective goals - complete detachment from matter.
etdvdn eva yogena samagreneha yoginah
yujyate 'bhimato hy artho yad asangas tu krtsnasah
3.32   Entanglemenl In Fruitive Activities
28. But those who are averse to Transcendence realize the Ahsolute Truth differently
through mistaken speculation and thus everything appears to them falsé.
L i n k : 'Everything is falsé' is not true. Lord Kapila explains in 3.32.29 that everything
rests on Him.
29. From mahat-tattva, I manifested the falsé ego, the three modes, the five elements,
eleven senses, etc. (explained in 3.26). The whole universe has come from Me.
30. H o w to attain this knowiedge? - By faith, bhakti, practice of yoga and
detachment, with a constantly controlled mind, and by giving up matériái
association.
L i n k 23 —> 31: Lord Kapila concludes his explanation of knowiedge of                  self-realization
(jfiánarh tad   brahma-darsanam).
31. Thus I have explained to you about jndna, realization of Brahman, by which one
understands the truth about prakrti and purusa.
3 2 - 3 6 : V A R I O U S P A T H S , l í r i M A m Y T o REALIZE   BHA^^I||||||||||||^^
32. Either by bhakti (devotional service) or by jndna (philosophical research) one has
to find the same destination, the Supreme Personality of Godhead (Bhagaván).
L i n k : But it is well known that the jndnís attain Brahman and not Bhagavdn!                    Then
how can the destination of both bhaktas and jnanis be the same?
33. Just as a single object is appreciated differently by different senses, the Lord is
one, but according to different scriptural practices He appears to be different.
yathendriyaih prthag-dvdrair  artho bahu-gundsrayah
eko ndneyate tadvad   bhagavdn sdstra-vartmabhih
Note: Perceiving milk with different senses - When we see milk, we see that it is
white; when we taste it, it appears palatable. When we touch milk, it appears cold;
when we smell it, it appears aromatic; and when we hear, we understand that it is
called milk. But one can best appreciate the milk with the tongue, by tasting it and
not with the eyes, nostrils or ears. Similarly...
Approaching the Supreme Lord by different means - Those who try to find the
Lord by mentái speculation may approach His bodily effulgence (impersonal
Brahman); those who try to find Him by mystic yoga may realize Him as the localized
Supersoul; but those who directly approach the Supreme Truth by bhakti-yoga can see
Him face to face as Bhagaván. Thus, the Supreme Lord is the ultimate destination of
all the processes but depending on the particular process one follows, one reaches a
WWm'MWMWmemwmMWMM
Canto 3 Overview   ^HB^'^^íjfíWiÉ^
particular aspect of the Lord. But the Bhagaván realization (by bhakti) includes the
realizations of the Lord's Paramátma and Brahman features as well (3.32.26). Thus
Bhakti is the best path and Bhagaván realization is the ultimate.
L i n k : What are the various spiritual practices by which the Lord can be perceived?
34-36. Different scriptural practices - pious actions, sacrifices, cbarities (for
grhasthas); austerities (for vdnaprasthas),    Vedic study and discussion (for
brahmacdris); control of senses and mind, renunciation (for sannydsis); yoga practice,
bhakti, sakdma and niskdma, varndsrama activities, understanding tbe nature of
dtmd, and firm detachment.
3 7 - 4 3 : Q U A L I F I C A T I O N T O REGEIVÉ T H I S K N O W L E D G E
37-38. I bave answered all three of your questions in 3.29.1-4 (Q5, Q6, Q7) -
about tbe four types of bhakti, tbe nature of time and tbe birtb and deatb of tbe jiva
caused by ignorance, because of wbicb tbe jiva doesn't understand its destination.
39-40. These teachings are not meant for tbe envious, agnostics, those unclean in
behavior, proud, bypocrites, greedy, materially attacbed, nondevotees and those wbo
bate devotees.
41-42. These teachings should be given to the - faitbful, devotees, respectful, non-
envious, friendly to all jivas, eager to rendet service, detacbed, peaceful minded,
unselfisb, pure and wbo bave taken tbe Lord to be tbe most dear object.
43. Phala-Sruti - One wbo faitbfuUy bears or speaks this topic acbieves tbe Lord's
abode.
ifilír'ÍAÍMÍri^^^                                    3.33 Activities Of Kapila
3 . 3 3 ACTIVITIES O F KAPILA
2-3: Lord as the cause of unlimited
universes
4-5: Lord as Vata-patra-s'ayI and
the purpose of His appearance
1-8: Devahüti's
prayers              6-7: Even a candala who chants
the holy name of the Lord
becomes glorious
8: Respects to various forms of the
Lord
9-12: Lord Kapila        Achieve premá by having faith in
gave final             these instructions as many self-
instructions to !        realized persons have achieved
Devahúti and left        perfection hy following this path.
13-23: Her practice - Bhakti,
3 . 3 3 Activities                                intense austerities, detachment,
meditation on Lord's form
of Kapila
13-32: Devahuti
achieved           24-32: Her achievement - hliss due
perfection              to destruction of sarhsára,
samádhi, Lord at Siddha-pada; her
purified body hecame a sacred
river
W e n t towards northeast (Gaiigá-
33-35: Activities of      ságara). Even now He is staying
Lord Kapila           there in trance for the deliverance
of the three worlds.
O n e who hears or teaches this
36-37: Phala-Sruti      knowiedge attains Lord's lotus feet
and abode
Canto 3 OverView          '••íílf ijj^ir^^^
L i n k : After     hearing   the teachings      of Lord     Kapila,          Devahüti       offers     her prayers.      Then
Kapila      gives    His final    instructions         to her and          leaves       to Gangá-sdgara.               Devahüti
follows     those instructions     and perfects        her   life.
1. H e a r i n g the words of L o r d K a p i l a , Devahüti became free from ignorance, and
offered her respects to H i m and the following prayers.
Illlllllll^^                                     DEVAHÚTI'S PRAYERS
2-4: How did You appear in my Womb?
2. E v e n B r a h m a , w h o takes birth from the lotus flower g r o w n from Y o u r abdomen,
simply meditated upon Y o u , whose body is the source of u n l i m i t e d u n i v e r s e s .                           [Your
body is the source            of all the universes,          and      still     You put          Your    body   within      the
abdomen       of a common        tvoman    like me.]
3. B y Y o u r diverse energies, creation, maintenance and dissolution take place. Y o u
are self-determined and the L o r d of a l l . T h i s is inconceivable to us.
4. H o w is that possible for the Supreme O n e , w h o has i n H i s belly the whole cosmic
manifestation, to take birth from my abdomen? I t is possible, for at the end of the
millennium Y o u appear as V a t a - p a t r a - s á y i and lick the toe of Y o u r lotus foot.
5. P u r p o s e    of Y o u r appearance          -    T o d i m i n i s h sinful activities, to enrich and
distribute knowledge i n devotion and liberation.
6. E v e n a canddla      w h o chants the name, hears, remembers or offers obeisances to the
L o r d immediately becomes qualified to perform V e d i c sacrifices. W h a t to speak of
persons w h o see Y o u ?
yan-ndmadheya-sravandnuktrtandd
yat-prahvandd         yat-smarandd             api     kvacit
svddo      'pi sadyah savandya                kalpate
kutah punas te bhagavan                  nu    darsandt
7. T h e y are glorious even if born i n canddla                     families, whose tongues are chanting.
T h e y must have executed austerities (tapa),                   fire sacrifices (juhuvuh),              taken holy baths
(sasnur),     achieved good manners of Áryans,                   and studied the Vedas                    (brahmdnücur).
aho bata sva-paco              'to      gariydn
yaj-jihvdgre        vartate        ndmatubhyam
tepus tapas te juhuvuh              sasnur         dryd
brahmdnücur           ndma grnanti            ye te
8. I offer m y obeisances to Y o u , w h o are - (i) V i s n u , (ii) B r a h m a n , (iii) the Supreme
Person, (iv) the object of meditation of the purified m i n d , (v) the destroyer of the
influence of three modes and (vi) the repository of the                               Vedas.
3.33 Activities Of Kapila             203
9 - 1 2 : L O R D KAPILA G A V E FINAL INSTRUCTIONS T O D E V A H U T I A N D LEFT
I
9. Kapila, satisfied by the words of His mother, towards whom He was very
affecrionare, replied with gravity.
10. " B y following this easy path of bhakti rhar I have instructed to you, you shall very
soon be liberated, even within your present body.
11. Please have faith in these instructions that are practiced by those who know the
truth, and which will give you fearlessness. Those who are not conversant with these
will attain death."
12. Maitreya: Lord Kapila took permission from his mother and left home.
[ 3 - 3 2 ; DEVAHÚTI ACHIEVED PERFECTION
13. As instructed by Kapila, she engaged in Bhakti in that house of Kardama Muni.
14. Due to intense austerities her body hecame thin and her hair matted.
15-19: Opulence of the palace of Kardama Muni
15. The opulence of the home of Kardama was sometimes envied by higher denizens.
16. There are white bed sheets and mattresses, ivory chairs and benches covered by
cloths of lace with golden filigree, and golden couches which had very soft pillows.
17. There are first-class marble walls which were decorated with valuahle jewels
producing light. The female members were all amply decorated with jewelry.
18. Beautiful gardens, with sweet, fragrant flowers and many fruit bearing trees were
present. The whole atmosphere was as pleasing as possible.
19. The Gandharvas would sing about Kardama Muni's glorious household life.
Kardama gave his wife all protection at all times.
20-21: In spite of opulence, Devahüti lamented for her son
20. Saintly Devahüti, in spite of her many possessions, gave up all such comforts. She
was only sorry that her great son was separated from her.
21. Devahüti's husband had already left home, and then her only son, Kapila, left
home. Although she was pure and knew all the truths, she was very aggrieved at the
loss of her son, just as a cow is affected when her calf dies.
22-23: Devahüti's practice
22. Meditating upon her son, Kapila, the Supreme Lord, she quickly hecame
unattached to her nicely decorated home.
Canto 3 Overview   gl^^gg^J^^Ű^^M^^J^M^j^M
23. Thereafter, having heard with great eagerness and in all detail from her son (in
3.28), Devahüti hegan to meditate constantly upon the form of Visnu.
24-26: Devahüti's Achievement
24-25. She practiced bhakti-yoga endowed with strong renunciation and knowiedge,
and purity of mind. Being fully absorbed in meditation, all misgivings disappeared.
26. Her mind hecame fixed in Bhagaván, and she automatically realized the
knowiedge of Brahman. She attained bliss and all matériái pangs disappeared, as she
was freed from matériái designations.
Note: Devahüti fixed her mind on the full svarüpa of the Lord. If one has complete
knowiedge of Supreme Lord, then the knowiedge of impersonal Brahman and
Paramátma are automatically realized.
27-29: Devahüti's External Disposition
27. Due to attaining eternal trance and freedom from illusion, she forgót her body.
28. She did not become thin as she had no mentái anxiety at that time.
29. Completely absorbed in Vásudeva, she was unaware that her body, with unbound
hair and disarrayed clothing, was being protected by the Lord.
30-32: Devahüti attained perfection
30. By following the principles instructed by Kapila, she hecame liberated and
quickly achieved the Lord, without difficulty.
31. She attained perfection in the sacred and famous place called Siddhapada.
32. The matériái elements of her body melted into water and are now a flowing river,
which is the most sacred of all rivers. Anyone who bathes there also attains
perfection.
3 3 - 3 7 : ACTIVITIES O F L O R D KAPILA
33. Lord Kapila left with the permission of H i s mother and went towards the
northeast (in the direction of Gangá-ságara).
34. He was praised hy the Siddhas, Cáranas, Gandharvas, sages and Apsarás. The
ocean offered H i m oblations and a place of residence (Gaiigá-ságara).
35. Even now Lord Kapila is staying there in trance for the deliverance of the three
worlds, and all the acaryas of the system of Sáhkhya philosophy are worshiping H i m .
36-37. Phala-sruti - This is the purest of all pure discourses. One who hears, reads
or expounds this knowiedge, becomes a devotee and attains the lotus feet and the
abode of the Lord, who is carried by Garuda.
SPECIAL VERSES
^
' -^^ ^             'Y
1 . Humanlíke Pastimes
yan martya-lílaupayikarh...         207
2 . Extraordinary Mercy
aho baki yarti stana... 210
3 . Personalised T r a n s f o r m a t i o n
tasyáravinda-nayanasya... 212
4 . Association of Devotees
satárti prasangan mama...          216
5 . Service Surpasses Liberation
sálokya-sarsti-sámípya... 218
6 . Worshipable Cbanter
yan namadheya...; aho hata sva paco... 220
7. Timeline of Embryonic Development...          224
8 . Five Layers of Ignorance
sasarjágre 'ndha-támisram...           226
mmxMmmm                                              1. Humanlike Pastimes
1 . HUMANLIKE         PASTIMES
yan martya-lilaupayikam sva-yoga-
máyá-balaih darsayatá grhitam
vismápanam svasya ca saubhagarddheh
paraih padam bhüsana-bhüsanángam
"The Lord appeared (darsayatd grhitam) in the mortal world (martya)
by His internál potency, yoga-máyá [sva-yoga-mdyd-balam).        He came
in   H i s eternal form, which       is just suitable for His pastimes
(lilaupayikath),   which are wonderful (vismdpanam) for everyone, even
for those proud of their own opulence (saubhagarddheh                 páram
padarh), including the Lord Himself in H i s form as the Lord of
Vaikuntha (svasya). Thus H i s [Sri Krsna's] transcendental body is the
ornament of all ornaments (bhüsana-bhüsandngam)."        [SB 3.2.12]
Context: Vidura, being unaware of the departure of Lord Krsna and the Yadu
dynasty from this world, meets Uddhava on the banks of the Yamuná, and asks of
their welfare. I n deep separation from the Lord, Uddhava replies to Vidura's inquiry,
but not directly, instead he speaks a series of verses about Krsna's pastimes and
qualities, inspired by his love or prema.
Emphasis: The above verse in particular emphasizes how the humanlike form of
Lord Krsna is the supreme most, compared to all the other manifestations of the
Supreme Lord. Similarly, attraction and affection towards Lord Krsna is the best,
compared to the other forms. This is the verdict of all acaryas, as it will be evident
from the list of quotations below.
I    Special Verses         *fáí%tlfáfkWif^MW^^
1.   More Mercy: In Vaikuntha, the Lord is merciful toward the liberated living
entities, but in His pastimes in the mortal world. He is merciful even to the fallen
souls. (3.2.12 P)
2.   Excellent Pastimes: The rása-lllá and householder life with sixteen thousand
wives is wonderful even for Náráyana in Vaikuntha what more for other living
entities. (3.2.12 P)
3.   Faultless: One should not think that the Lord has somé fault because He has
humán pastimes. On the contrary, the humán pastimes are superior to the
Vaikuntha pastimes. (3.2.12 V )
4.   Identical: Though it is said that the Lord accepted this form, His form is
inseparable from Himself. (3.2.12 V )
5.   Unique Sweetness: The sweetness and intimacy Lord Krsna manifested in
Vrndávana constitute a unique kind of opulence found nowhere else, even in
Vaikuntha. (10.90.47 P)
6.   Manifestation of Yogamáyá: "Even a fractional understanding of Krsna's
heauty can mérge all three worlds in the ocean of love. He attracts all living
entities within the three worlds. The transcendental form of Krsna is shown to
the world by Lord Krsna's internál, spiritual energy, which is a transformation of
pure goodness." ( C C Madhya-lila 21.99-103)
7.   64th Quality: Srila Rüpa Gosvami quotes this verse (3.2.12) as evidence to the
64* quality of Lord Krsna, rupa-madhuryam,      that is, the sweetness of His form.
(BRS 2.1.215)
8.   Topmost Rasa: While describing about the various kinds of rasas or tastes that
one can experience in life (from the mundane self-centered happiness or matériái
rasa, right up to the rasa for the Supreme Lord), Srila Jiva Gosvami quotes this
verse (3.2.12) to conclude that the rasas of perceiving Lord Krsna, is the topmost.
(Priti Sandarhha, Anuccheda 110)
9.   Beautifies Ornaments: The uddipanas (impetuses for ecstatic love), such as the
ornaments and paraphernalia of the Lord, become empowered and glorious due
to contact with the Lord. Quoting "bhüsana-bhüsanángam,"         Srila Jiva Gosvami
proves this. (Priti Sandarhha, Anuccheda 155)
á*íi                  1. Humanlike Pastimes
•5
10. Beautifies Qualities: In the discussion of the 64 qualities of Lord Krsna, Srila
Jiva Gosvami and Srila Visvanátha Cakravarti Thakura, both quote this verse in
their commentaries, to show how these 64 qualities become even more amazing
when exhibited by Krsna, especially when He becomes absorbed in the role of an
ordinary humán on earth. Lurther, Srila Jiva Gosvami states that these 64
qualities are not the cause of amazement for those who relish Krsna, since they
are absorbed in His sweetness. (Commentaries on BRS 2.1.39-40)
11. Supreme Personality of Godhead: This verse (along with other verses from the
Bhágavatam and Bhagavad-gitá), clearly shows that Lord Krsna is the Originál
Personality of Godhead (Srila Jiva Gosvámi's Sarva-samvádini commentary of
Krsna Sandarhha, Anuccheda 82)
12. Bestows Great Happiness: Lord Krsna exists with all superior qualities. One of
them is His quality of "bestowing great happiness." 3.2.12 is an example of this
quality. (Jiva Gosvámi's Durgama Sangamani tika of BRS 1.1.1)
13. Rare But Unique: " T h e attraction for Krsna is highly uncommon yet most
blissful even in comparison to the other avatáras of the L o r d . " As evidence for
this, Srila Jiva Gosvámi and Srila Visvanátha Cakravarti, both quote 3.2.12, in
their commentaries of BRS 2.5.108.
14. Pleasure to Other Forms: The other forms of the Lord, upon seeing Krsna
become fiiled with bliss. (1.1.3 V )
15. Appeared to give Joy: The Lord appeared in this world not only on the request
of lord Brahmá, but also appeared to give joy to His devotees by revealing His
inconceivahle, variegated form, qualities, and pastimes fiiled with rasa, since He
is the Lord of yoga-máyá. (11.6.42 V )
16. Attractive: "Lveryone showed more affection to Lord Gauranga than to their
own    sons,   for   the   Lord    stole   everyone's    heart   just by His    presence."
Bhaktisiddhánta Sarasvati Tháküra comments on this statement that "the Lord of
the samvit potency is so powerful that He forcibly attracts all transcendentally
pure objects." And refers to verse 3.2.12 as an evidence. ( C B Adi-khanda 4.106)
Special Verses   ^///jjl^^^J^^^M^^J^^Í^^^^Í^
2 . EXTRAORDINARY M E R C Y
aho baki yam stana-kála-kütam
jighámsayápáyayad apy asádhvi
lebhe gatirii dhátry-ucitám tato 'nyam
karii vá dayálum saranam vrajema
"Alas (aho), how shall I take shelter (saranam vrajema) of one
more merciful than He (tato 'nyam kam vá dayálurh) who granted
the position (lebhe gatim) of mother (dhátry-ucitám)          to a she-
demon [Pütaná] (baki) although she was unfaithful (asádhvi) and
she prepared (ápáyayad)       deadly poison to be sucked from her
breast (stana-kála-kütam)}"    [SB 3.2.23]
Context: Continuing his reply to Vidura, Uddhava, remembers the Lord's sweet
mercy during His childhood pastimes. He now quotes an extrémé incidence of the
Lord's exhihition of compassion, not unto a devotee, but instead unto a démon who
came in disguise, harboring the desire to kill H i m .
This amazing display of mercy by the Lord increasingly spreads the glories of His
fame    and character.     The following list     of     citations   showcases the various
appreciations of the acaryas about this transcendental pastime and nature of the
Supreme Lord.
1.   Extrémé Mercy: "Here is an example of the extrémé mercy of the Lord, even to
His enemy. It is said that a noble man accepts the good qualities of a person of
doubtful character, just as one accepts nectar from a stock of poison." (3.2.23 P)
2. Extraordinary Mercy
2.   Ultimate Shelter: " T h e Lord accepts the least qualification of the living entity
and awards him the highest reward. That is the standard of His character.
Therefore, who but the Lord can be the ultimate shelter?" (3.2.23 P)
3.   Special E x a m p l e : "Though Pütaná only had the dress of a devotee, she attained
love suitable to a devotee. Though she hated the Lord, He made her a special
example. This incident shows Krsna's quality of giving liberation and bhakti to
even those who hate h i m . " (3.2.23 V )
4.   Gratitude: I n explaining the process of devotional service to Srila Sanátana
Goswámi, Lord Caitanya quotes the aho baki yam verse to suhstantiate how the
Lord fulfills all desires, and even gives Himself to His devotees who have given up
all other engagements to sérve H i m . ( C C Madhya lila 22.96-98)
5.   Source    of Compassion:        Srila   Bhaktisiddhánta   Sarasvati tháküra   in his
commentary to Sri Caitanya Bhágavata writes how the verse "tomd' vine saranya
dayálu náhi ára" (there is no shelter or source of compassion other than You) is
explained by the aho baki yam verse. ( C B Ádi-khanda 13.168)
6.   Himalayan Blunder: "Only the most unfortunate, unintelligent, foolish, hellish
person gives up the service to the lotus feet of Krsna, which is the topmost
occupational duty, and contemplates or endeavors for anything else." Srila
Bhaktisiddhánta Sarasvati tháküra quotes the aho baki yam verse, to expound his
statement. (CB Madhya-khanda 1.160)
7.   Guna-Gráhí: Srila Bhaktisiddhánta Sarasvati tháküra quotes the aho baki yam
verse as evidence to how "the Lord only accepts the good qualities of the fault-
filled living entities; He is known as guna-gráhi.    He who sees only the good in
others. He does not find any fault in others." ( C B Antya-khanda 1.276)
8.   Perfection of Gokula-nandana: Rüpa Gosvámi states, " I n Dváraká, Mathurá
and other places, Krsna appears as perfect and more perfect. But in Gokula,
Krsna appears as the most perfect." Jiva Gosvámi comments on how Lord Krsna
in Gokula is perfect in majesty, sweetness and mercy by quoting appropriate
verses. Lor fullness in mercy, he quotes the aho baki yam verse. (Durgama
Sangamani tika on BRS 2.1.223)
Special Versé!
3 . PERSONALISED TRANSFORMATION
Wifp
tasyáravinda-nayanasya padáravinda-
kinjalka-misra-tulasí-makaranda-váyuh
antar-gatah sva-vivarena cakára tesám
sahksobham aksara-jusám api citta-tanvoh
"When the breeze [vdyuh) carrying the aroma [makaranda) of tulasi leaves
from the toes [kinjalka-misra-tulasi)     of the lotus feet (padáravinda)         of the
lotus eyed Personality of Godhead (tasya áravinda-nayanasya)          entered [antar-
gatah] the nostrils [sva-vivarena]      of those sages [Kumdras]       [tesám],     they
experienced (cakára) a change (sanksobham) both in body and in mind (citta-
tanvoh), even though (api) they were attacbed to the impersonal Brahman
understanding (aksara-jusám)."    [3.15.43]
Context: This verse describes the blossoming of sánta-rati         (neutral appreciation) in
the four Kumáras when they smelled the fragrance of the lotus feet of the Lord
mixed with the aroma of tulasi. Previously having bhakti ringed with jndna, they now
acquired pure devotion for the Lord. The experience of the four Kumáras stands as
tacit proof of the extraordinary attractive power of the Supreme Lord's form and
qualities, and thus proves the superior realization and hliss of the devotees (bhaktas)
in comparison to all the other types of transcendentalists. The following are somé
interesting insights on this verse from the Vaisnava    ácáryas.
3. Personalised Transformation
1.   Being a Servant over an Equal: "Because of the fragrance of His lotus feet,
carried by the air and mixed with the aroma of tulasi, their minds changed;
instead of becoming one with the Supreme Lord, they thought it wise to be
devotees. Becoming a servitor of the lotus feet of the Lord is better than becoming
one with the L o r d . " (3.15.43 P)
2.   Brahmavadis vs. Mayavadis: "Those who are actually on the platform of
Brahman realization and who have not offended the lotus feet of Krsna can
immediately become Vaisnavas simply by smelling the aroma of the Lord's lotus
feet. But those who are offenders or demons are never attracted to the Lord's
personal feature, even though they may visit the Lord's temple many times." ( C C
Madhya lila 17.142 P)
3.   61 expianations of the átmáráma verse: 3.15.43 is quoted twice in this section
by Lord Caitanya, stating how the Kumaras hecame devotees ( C C Madhya lila
24.45 and 115)
4.   Átmárámas attracted: This is one of the verses Lord Caitanya speaks to
Prakasánanda Sarasvati to show how even átmárámas are attracted to Lord
Krsna. ( C C Madhya lila 25.158)
5.   Lord's M e r c y : Lven the most prominent jnanis who have realized oneness after
gaining knowiedge of átmá and brahman enter pure bhakti only by the mercy of
the Lord. (Jiva Cosvámi's commentary on BRS 1.2.20-21)
6.   Ecstatic symptoms: Lven those persons expert in impersonal brahma-jnána        later
developed ecstatic bodily symptoms from experiencing the form of the Lord. (Jiva
Coswami's commentary on BRS 2.1.293)
7.   T u l a s i as stimuli: Rupa Cosvami quotes 3.15.43 as evidence to how fragrance of
tulasi (among other items like conch, forest, river, etc.) can be stimuli for both
ddsa-bhaktas as well as the sdnta-bhaktas. (BRS 3.1.21-23)
8.   Lord vs. Brahman:
•    Superiority of seeing the Lord over realizing Brahman is made clear by this verse,
3.15.43 (Priti sandarhha anuccheda 7)
•    " A l l the happiness of impersonal brahman is as insignificant as the water in the
hoof print of a cow." (BRS 1.1.39) Llaborating on this point in his Durgama
sangamani tika, Jiva Cosvámi quotes SB 3.15.43, as a comparison of realization
of bliss of the Supreme Lord and Brahman
I        Special Verses   ^^BtíMÍ)í'^§ir«AÍ^^^^
9.   Realization of Sweetness: Sweetness is the pleasure experienced through the
Lord's form, qualities and pastimes. By realizing sweetness one attains love for
the Lord. Realizing only brahman produces only bliss for the self, which is
covered by the realization of the sweetness, which happened in the case of the
Kumáras on seeing the Lord. (Jiva Gosvami's Durgama sangamani tika on BRS
4.4.15)
10. Case Study: ' A jnání who had previously achieved complete perfection through
philosophical and realized knowiedge recognizes the Lord's lotus feet to be the
supreme.' Kumaras are an evidence for this as indicated by 3.15.43. (11.19.3 V )
11. Adbhuta-rasa: One of the causes of adbhuta-rasa (amazement) is 'experiencing
the bliss of the Lord's sweetness as greater than the bliss of impersonal brahman.'
This verse (3.15.43) is an evidence for this. (Durgama sangamani tika of BRS
4.8.2)
4. Association Of Devotees
satath prasangan mama vírya-saihvido
bhavanti hrt-karna-rasáyanáh   katháh
taj-josanad asv apavarga-vartmani
sraddhá ratir bhaktir anukramisyati
" I n the association of pure devotees (satath prasangan), discussion
(sarhvidah) of the pastimes (katháh)     and activities of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead (mama vtrya) is very pleasing and satisfying
(rasdyandh)     to the ear and the heart (hrt-karna).      By cultivating
(josandt)     such    knowiedge    (tat) one gradually becomes (dsu)
advanced on the path of liberation           (apavarga-vartmani),      and
thereafter he is freed (sraddhd),     and his attraction becomes fixed
(ratir).    Then real devotion and devotional service begin         (bhaktir
anukramisyati)."       [3.25.25]
Context: Lord Kapila in H i s instructions to Mother           Devahüti,     explains how
attachment for a devotee is beneficial, as it can lead one towards liberation. The Lord
then goes on to explain who exactly is a devotee by stating the qualities of a sádhu.
Linally, he quotes this verse, linking the association of devotees with the development
of bhakti.
Emphasis: This verse highlights the importance of devotee association, as well as the
gradual development of bhakti.
jÜl^l    Special Verse   J|J||r||^|^^|^^^
Srila Prabhupáda liberally quotes this verse in many purports to highiight the
importance of devotee association. He also provides vitai lessons that express how
this verse can be better appreciated. The following is a compilation of his words
along with one or two quotes from other ácáryas on the same note.
With the Association of Devotees...
1.   transcendental suhject matter becomes clear (BG 17.26-27 P)
2.   and by contemplating on the transcendental activities of the Lord, the path to
liberation is opened, and one is freed (3.25.25 P)
3.   one associates with the Lord (3.25.25 P)
4.   one develops the consciousness for rendering service to the Lord (3.25.25 P)
5. only, can the words of Lord Krsna be fully potent and relishable to the heart and
ear. (4.9.11 P, 7.8.1 P)
6.   the heart of a materialistic person is cleansed of lusty desires, just as silver
becomes shiny by being polished (4.22.20)
7.   one is awakened (from dreaming/sleep) and immediately the spirit soul is situated
in his own glory by understanding his constitutional position as the Lord's eternal
servant. (4.22.20)
8.   one can understand the transcendental name, fame, quality and activities of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. (4.24.59 P)
9.   one becomes attacbed to hearing and chanting about the Lord. Thus cultivating
Krsna consciousness, one can become faitbful to the Lord, devoted to the Lord
and attacbed to the Lord, and thus one can very quickly attain full Krsna
consciousness. (4.29.39-40)
10. one can relish the glorification of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Just
through a little association with a pure devotee, one can become successful in his
journey back to Godhead (5.13.21 P)
11. one can authoritatively understand the position of the Lord and His devotees.
(7.4.44 P)
12. even a démon can become a devotee (8.22.36 P)
13. the glorification of the Lord becomes potent (4.20.24 P)
14. and their instructions, one becomes more and more purified of matériái desires
(10.10.17 P)
15. the mind develops attraction to the Lord (3.25.25 V )
16. fortunate     souls attain faith in unalloyed devotional service (Bhaktivinoda
tháküra's Amnáya-sütra, Part two, Chapter two, Sutra 56)
I Ö ' l í i 'Ö'^lí^                                         4. Association Of Devotees               I
Without the Association of Devotees...
1.   one cannot make advancement. (3.25.25 P)
2.   one cannot understand the activities of the Lord (3.25.25 P)
3.   one cannot understand that the Absolute Truth can be a person and have personal
activities. (3.25.25 P)
4.   one will think that these activities are fictional, manufactured stories because
spiritual life is not explained to them in the proper mood. (3.25.25 P)
Other Citations of this Verse
1.   Krsnadása Kavirája Gosvámi quotes this verse in the context of diksa and siksá
gurus being non-different to Krsna, and their association being essential for
spiritual advancement ( C C Adi 1.60)
2.   Lord Caitanya quotes this twice; Once, to suhstantiate that advancement is made
possible only in the association of devotees, and second, to illustrate the stages of
advancement in devotional service ( C C Madhya 22.86, C C Madhya 23.16)
3.   Hearing from great devotees has immediate effect. (Bhakti Sandarhha Anuccheda
11)
4.   Rüpa Gosvámi quotes 3.25.25 (along with other verses) to prove that the word
rati in the Bhágavatam indicates bháva, while the word bhakti indicates prema.
(BRS 1.3.12)
5.   "One must strive to achieve the association of pure devotees," Bhaktivinoda
tháküra quotes 3.25.25 to suhstantiate his statement. (Bhajana Rahasya C h 2)
6. Just as Lord Kapila instructed Devahuti, so did Lord Caitanya instruct Mother
Saci, "Therefore, O mother, worship Krsna in the association of devotees. Think
of Krsna and chant the name of H a r i " I n his purport, Bhakti Siddhánta Sarasvati
tháküra quotes 3.25.25 (along with other verses) as commentary. (CB Madhya-
khanda 1.239)
7. Bhaktivinoda tháküra        comments      that   this   verse   describes     the   gradual
development of bhakti through the association of genuine sadhus (Bhajana
8.   " B y having a taste of Your topics they attained nearness to you. By developing
taste for those topics one can realize Y o u . " Jiva Cosvámi substantiates this
statement by quoting 3.25.25 (Vaisnava tosani 10.14.5).
Special Verses                                                                   W J
LiT^.ÍKjT**X3W_Xé*m
5. SERVICE SURPASSES LIBERATION
salokya-sarsti-samipya- sarupyaikatvam apy uta
diyamánaih na grhnanti viná mat-sevanam janáh
" A pure devotee (janáh) does not accept (na grhnanti)      any kind of
liberation—sálokya, sársti, sámipya, sárüpya or (api) ekatva—even if
(uta) they are offered (diyamánarh),    without service for Me      (viná
mat-sevanarh)." [3.29.13]
Context: This verse appears in Kapiladeva's explanation of mixed (3.29.8-10), and
pure devotional service (3.28.11-13). Sálokya means living on the same planet as the
Lord. Sársti means having powers similar to the Lord's. Sámipya means staying near
the Lord. Sárüpya        means having a form similar to the Lord's. Ekatvam           means
merging with the Lord. Devotees do not accept these five kinds of liberation if they
don't offer them a chance to rendet service to the Lord. The following are the various
facets of this verse that are highlighted by the Vaisnava ácáryas.
1.   Lord's Service as Priority
(i) The yogis and empiric philosophers desire cessation of the process of birth
and death, but a devotee is satisfied to remain even in this matériái world
and execute devotional service. (3.29.13 P)
(ii) Por a devotee there is no question of desiring any matériái or spiritual
prosperity. He simply aspires to sérve the Lord. That is his highest
happiness. (3.29.13 P)
(iii) Devotees do not accept these without service to me. This means that if somé
devotees do accept these things, they accept for service to me. (3.29.13 V )
wmMtmm.                                               5. Service Surpasses Liberation
(iv)    Sáyujya by its nature is without service since there is only oneness in it.
Sárüpya is useful for service, with a form of great beauty. Thus devotees
accept these things according to how useful they are in their service. (Priti
Sandarhha 51)
2.   Kaimutya-nyáya: Kapila explains the lack of matériái desire in the devotees who
have pure bhakti, by the method of kaimutya-nyáya.         Devotees do not accept even
spiritual henedictions, what to speak of accepting matériái things! (3.29.13 V )
3.   Lord's Test: By showing or promising [diyamánam)             enjoyment and powers to
devotees, Lord tests H i s devotees, who were filled with devotion. (1.7.40 V )
4.   T w o kinds of desires: one is desire for happiness and power; the other, is desire
for prema. Devotees never accept the first variety. 3.29.13 is an evidence for this.
(BRS 1.2.56-57)
5.   B h a k t i Superior to Liberation
(i)    Rüpa Gosvámi quotes this verse as proof of how bhakti is superior to
liberation. (BRS 1.2.28)
(ii) Jiva Gosvami quotes this verse in his commentary, to show how devotees
who are like makaras (sharks) frolic in the ocean of bhakti-rasa, ignoring
the rivers of liberation (Durgama sangamani tiká of BRS 1.1.4)
(iii)   Haridás tháküra quotes this verse to deride the desire for liberation ( C C
Antya 3.189)
6.   G o a l of L i f e : This verse (among other verses) is quoted in order to state that
liberation as a humán goal is useless. (Priti Sandarhha 21)
7.   Similar Verse: "Lven though dharma, artha, káma               and moksa automatically
come to the devotees, they do not look at them or accept them." Bhaktisiddhánta
Sarasvati tháküra quotes 3.29.13 as a reference in his commentary. ( C B Antya-
khanda 5.059)
Special Verses
-mjtj                                 A   •m.
^ # V ^ Z # : á
6 . WORSHIPABLE CHANTER
yan-námadheya-sravanánukírtanád
yat-prahvanád yat-smaranád api kvacit
svádo 'pi sadyah savanaya kalpate
kutah punas te bhagavan nu darsanat
" T o say nothing {kutah nu) of the spiritual advancement of persons who see the
Supreme Person (bhagavan) face to face (darsanat), even a person born in a family of
dog-eaters (svádo 'pi) immediately (sadyah) becomes eligible (kalpate) to perform
Vedic sacrifices (savanáya) if he once (kvacit) utters the holy name of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead (yat námadheya) or chants about H i m (aniikirtanát), hears
about His pastimes (sravana), offers H i m obeisances (yat prahvanát)       or even
remembers H i m (yat smaranát)." [3.33.6]
aho bata sva-paco 'to garíyán
yaj-jihvágre vartate náma tubhyam
tepus tapas te juhuvuh sasnur áryá
brahmánücur náma grnanti ye te
" O h , how glorious (aho bata) are they whose tongues (yaj-jihvágre)    are chanting
Your holy name! (náma tubhyam)        Even if born in the families of dog-eaters (sva-
pacah), such persons are worshipable (gariyán).    Persons (ye) who chant the holy
name of Your Lordship (te náma grnanti), must have executed all kinds of austerities
(tepus tapah) and fire sacrifices (juhuvuh) and achieved all the good manners of the
Áryans (áryáh). T o be chanting the holy name of Your Lordship, they must have
bathed at holy places of pilgrimage (sasnuh), studied the Vedas (brahma anücuh) and
fulfilled everything required." [3.33.7]
&'Íf'Q^éí'^l^éf'&ét'^l^éf'G^                                                          6. Worshipable Chante
Context: Kapila gives His final instructions to mother Devahüti and in response, she
offers a set of prayers, imbued with her realizations (3.33.2-8). Verses 6 and 7,
presents the glories of the holy name. A devotee who chants the holy name, is said to
have attained all the necessary qualifications to be engaged in Vedic sacrifices, study
etc. Since the holy name of Lord Krsna is Krsna Himself, it is completely spiritual and
transcendental. Thus chanting of the holy name somehow or the other is always
effective. However, offenseless chanting is emphasized by Srila Prabhupáda. The
following are various quotations of ácáryas in relation to these verses.
1.    Potency of H o l y Name: Heréin the spiritual potency of chanting, hearing or
remembering the holy name of the Supreme Lord is greatly stressed. (3.33.6 P)
2.    Offenseless Chanting:
i.   Sridhara Svámi's remark, anena püjyatvam       laksyate (by this, he is seen as
respectable), is applicable if one chants offenselessly, for he immediately
becomes more than a bráhmana. (3.33.6 P)
ii.    As it is stated in 3.33.6, a person who has once offenselessly chanted the holy
name becomes immediately eligible to do Vedic sacrifices. (3.33.7 P)
3.    Vanquish sinful reactions:
i.   Devotional service vanquishes the reactions of sinful - pápám, kütam, bijam
and phalonmukham - as mentioned in Padma Purána. (6.1.15 P)
ii.   Srila Rüpa Goswámi quotes 3.33.6 to show how chanting leads to the
destruction of manifest sinful reactions, prdrabdha. (BRS 1.1.21)
iii.   Srila Jiva Goswámi and Srila Bhaktivinoda Tháküra writes that 3.33.6
highlights how bhakti easily destroys the prdrabdha sins that result in taking
birth in a low-class family. (Bhakti Sandarhha Anuccheda 128, Bhakti Tattva
Viveka Chapter I I I )
4.    Mistake of vaisnave játi-buddhih:
i.   "Those who find fault in the Western Vaisnavas should consider this
statement from Srimad-Bhágavatam and the commentary on this verse by
Srila Jiva Gosvámi." ( C C Madhya 16.186 P)
ii.   C B Madhya 10.100 reads, " A l l the scriptures declare that a Vaisnava may be
born in any family, but he is certainly situated in the topmost position." Srila
Bhaktisiddhánta Sarasvati Tháküra quotes verses 3.33.6-7 in his commentary
as evidence.
iii.        Lord Caitanya quotes 3.33.7 to glorify Haridas Thakura ( C C Madhya
11.192)
iv.         Vallabha Bhatta glorifies Rüpa Goswámi and Sri Vallabha's position as the
most exalted due to chanting constantly. ( C C Madhya 19.72)
V.         Kálidása quotes 3.33.7 in glorification of Jhadu Tháküra ( C C Antya 16.27)
vi.         Mahá-pátra glorifies the humility of the Muslim governor, who become
transformed simply by seeing the Lord by quoting 3.33.6. ( C C Madhya
16.168)
vii.        The devotee should not be disrespected even if he comes from low caste or
has had conduct (like eating dogs). (Bhakti Sandarhha Anuccheda 247)
5. Asamskrta: A person who is not purified by the prescribed process of samskara is
called asamskrta.        Chanting of holy name qualifies a asarhskrta to become a
bráhmana. ( C C Antya 3.124 P)
6.    Purpose of Vedas: One must be intelligent enough to understand the purpose of
the Vedas, without being attacbed to the rituals only. ( B G 2.46 P)
7.    Beyond Vedic Study:
i.    Advanced yogis are not attracted to the rituals of the scriptures, but they
automatically become attracted to the yoga principles, which can elevate
them to complete Krsna consciousness, the highest yoga perfection. (BG
6.44 P)
ii.       One who has taken shelter of the Lord's holy name, which is identical with
the Lord, does not have to study Vedánta philosophy, for he has already
completed all such study. ( C C Adi 7.72 P)
iii.       Bhaktisiddhánta Sarasvati Tháküra quotes 3.33.7 (among other verses) as an
answer to the question " W h y did Lord Caitanya leave the study of Vedánta
to make a big show of kirtana?" (CB Antya-khanda 8.134)
8.    But not disregard Vedic study: Taking advantage of these verses, there are somé
sahajiyás who, taking everything very cheaply, consider themselves elevated
Vaisnavas but do not care even to touch the Vedánta philosophy. A real Vaisnava
should, however, study Vedánta philosophy, but if after studying Vedánta one
does not adopt the chanting of the Lord's holy name, he is no better than a
Máyávádi. ( C C Adi 7.72 P)
6. Worshipable Chanter
9. T i p of Tongue: It is said that those who simply chant the holy name with the tip
of the tongue are glorious. One does not even have to chant the holy name and
understand the whole procedure, namely the offensive stage, offenseless stage and
pure stage. (3.33.7 P)
10. One Name: It is said hetein that náma, a singular number, one name, Krsna or
Ráma, is sufficient. It is not that one has to chant all the holy names of the Lord.
(3.33.7 P)
11. If once, why not always?: If one chants once only, it is to be understood that he
has already passed all the examinations, not to speak of those who are chanting
always, twenty-four hours a day. (3.33.7 P)
12. Unto Y o u only: One must chant God's name (tubhyam), not, as the Máyávádi
philosophers say, any name, such as a demigod's name or the names of God's
energies. (3.33.7 P)
13. Chant Pleasingly: The holy name has to be chanted to please the Supreme Lord,
and not for any sense gratification or professional purpose. If this pure mentality
is there, then even though a person is born of a low family, such as a dog-eater's,
he is so glorious that not only has he purified himself, but he is quite competent
to deliver others. (3.33.7 P)
14. Windfall: By the grace of Lord Caitanya, one who chants the             mahá-mantra
attains the highest perfectional stage, which was attained by Pracetás. (A.IAAA P)
15. B i r t h rights are wrong: One need not have taken birth in an aristocratic
bráhmana family to attain the lotus feet of Krsna, nor is a person born in a low
family unfit for achieving Krsna's lotus feet. ( C C Antya 4.70 P)
16. Vaisnava is already a Bráhmana: "Though a Vaisnava appears in a dog-eater
family, still he is not a non-bráhmana.        His brahminical qualifications are
eternally perfected or previously acquired." (Bhaktisiddhánta Sarasvati Tháküra
in Bráhmana and Vaisnava, Appendixes: Viprasámya, "Brahmanism is their pre-
attained right.")
7. TIMELINE O F EMBRYONIC DEVELOPMENT
Embryology means the study of the growth of the embryo, from the fertilization of
an ovum to the birth of a child. Ancient Vedic texts like           Srimad-Bhágavatam,
Mahábhárata and the Purdnas also give this knowiedge. I n 3.31, Lord Kapila explains
how the embryo develops in the womh. The following table presents embryology
described by Lord Kapila along with the understanding of the modern medical
science that has been developed in over the past few decades. This comparison reveals
the richness of the Bhágavatam in presenting all the Information relevant for the
humán being.
Note: The colored letters in column 3 correspond to the modern understanding of the
medical science presented in column 4.
Time-      Relevant verses      Details from Srimad-             Understanding of modern
line                            Bhágavatam                       medical science
1" Day     SB 3.31.2:           The sperm and ovum mix           It is called 'Zygote' or
kalalarh tv eka-     (kalalam).                       fertilized ovum.
rdtrena
5* Day     panca-rdtrena        The mixture ferments into a      A bubble stage appears in five
budbudam             bubble [budbudam).               nights.
10*        dasdhena tu          It develops into a form like     It is called a solid, round
Day        karkandhüh pesy      a plum (karkandhüh), and         mass of cells.
andarh vd tatah      after that, it gradually turns
páram                into a lump of flesh or an
egg, as the case may be.
SB 3.31.3:           A head is förmed                 Embryo at 32 days shows the
Month      mdsena tu siro                                        head clearly
'íS*'íí'S^íF'lSír             7. Timeline Of Embryonic Development
2nd     dvdbhydth bdhv-       At the end of two months       Fetus will form hands, feet at
Month   anghry-ddy-anga-      the hands, feet and other      the end of two months
vigrahah              limbs take shape.
yé      nakha-lomdsthi-       Nails, fingers, toes, body     External genitalia are present
Month   carmdni linga-        hair, bones and skin appear,   in eight weeks' old embryo.
cchidrodbhavas        as do the organ of             According to science male
tribhih               generation and the other       genitalia take their final form
apertures in the body,         at the end of the third month
namely the eyes, nostrils,     and Utero-vaginal canal also
ears, mouth and anus.          forms by the third month.
4*      SB 3.31.4:            Seven essential ingredients    All the seven tissues (dhdtus)
Month   caturbhir dhdtavah    of the body, namely chyle,     are ready in the 4* month.
sapta                 blood, flesh, fat, bone,
marrow and semen, come
into existence.
5*      paiicabhih ksut-      Hunger and thirst make         Modern science does not
Month   trd-udbhavah          themselves felt.               know this fact. As the
intestines are functioning in
the 5th month it is rptt,iin
that the fetus drinks amniotic
fluid, when it feels. It proves
that the fetus must be
experiencing hunger and
thirst.
6*      sadbhir jardyund      At the end of six months,      The fetal movements are seen
Month   vitah kuksau          the fetus, enclosed by the     in the womh in the 6* month
bhrdmyati daksine     amnion, begins to move
7*      SB 3.31.10:           Endowed with the               Science cannot demonstrate
Month   drabhya saptamdn      development of                 this fact, but it can be
mdsdl                 consciousness from the 7*      inferred indirectly. The fetus
month after his concention     of 7* month is viable (can
labdha-bodho 'pi                                     V.* •   /   XXXV^XXLXX XU   T XLÍKy Xí^   \ WU.XX
vepitah naikatrdste                                  survive outside the womh by
süti-vdtair                                          keeping in incubator and will
visthd-bhür iva                                      not survive before 7* month),
sodarah                                              so its brain must be
functioning in the 7* month.
Special Verses
f a ^ F i v E         LAYERS O F IGNORANCE
w
sasarjágre 'ndha-támisram atha támisram ádi-krt
mahámoham ca mohám ca tamás cájnána-vrttayah
"Brahmá fitst created {sasarja agre) the nescient engagements [ajnána
vrttayah) like self-deception (tamah), the sense of death (andha-támisram),
anger after frustration {támisram), the sense of falsé ownership (mahá-
moham), and the illusory bodily conception, or forgetfulness of one's real
identity (mohám)." [3.12.2]
"Before the factual creation of the living entities in different varieties of species, the
conditions under which a living being in the matériái world has to live were created
by Brahmá." (3.12.2 P) What are these conditions? "The first condition of matériái
existence created is forgetfulness of one's real identity." (3.12.2 P) Why is this so?
"Unless a living entity forgets his real identity, it is impossible for him to live in the
matériái conditions of life." (3.12.2 P) Srila Prabhupáda gives the relation between
these five ajnána-vrttis, in his purport to this verse. And Srila Visvanátha Cakravarti
Tháküra's commentary on 3.12.2, co-relates these terms with Patanjali's Yogasütras,
describing five kinds of klesas (sufferings) as given below.
r             ~-\
one begins to j         Thus one í        Whenever 1       Therefore, i
Having
misidentify \        develops a i       there is an       there is a i
forgottén             oneself with j      falsé sense of     obstuction to     great struggle i
one's spiritual            matériái         ownership for            the               for     1
Identity              nature, i.e i      things offered j   enjoyment of       exsistence,
[tamás]              thinking self         by matériái      these objects,    fearing death j
to be the             nature          anger arises        [andha- 1
body [moha] j         [mahámoha] |         [támisra]     1 támisra]      i
V                J
avidyá -                                     raga-             dvesa -           ábhinivesa -
asmitá -
ignorance            falsé identity        attacnment i        repulsion          fear of death |
It's interesting to note, that this comparison, provides another kind of definition
altogether. Since the elements of ajnána and klesa match, based on the law of
transitivity, it is implicit that ajnána, ignorance is equal to klesa, suffering. Therefore,
ignorance has been directly equated with suffering.
•tXi'íí)í'e-íi   ML;                  •TA®                         miimm
Thematic Compilations                ú-fií'm~éf&'éí'm^é^^^^
T^J *!TíflLgJ^yij0.
1.   G l o r i e s of B h a k t i Y o g a       229
2.    G l o r i e s of K r s n a - k a t h a     233
3.    T h e Lord's Lotus Feet                   238
4.    Spirit of Bhágavatam Speaker and Hearer                242
5.    Prayers - A Supplication for Grace               245
6.    Reversais        247
7.    Feelings of Separation                   250
8.    Ideal Household life 253
9.    Obedience            256
Wonderful Darsana                 259
A                          1. Glories of Bhakti Yoga
. GLORIES O F BHAKTI Y O G A
Srimad-Bhágavatam      repeatedly emphasizes that bhakti-yoga is the best path that
reconnects the conditioned living entity to the Supreme Lord Krsna. The supremacy
of bhakti-yoga over other paths such as astánga-yoga           and jhána-yoga     in uplifting the
soul is repeatedly established in the Bhágavatam.             The following is a list of select
verses from the third canto that glorify the path of bhakti, categorized into relevant
sections. Only the themes of the verses are given so that the readers may appreciate
them at a glancé.
^ ^ ^ ^        BHAKTI AWARDS
Abode of the Lord
1.   Devotee with serious attitűdé, attains the Vaikunthaloka
[3.5.46 pánena te deva      kathá-sudháyáh...]
2.   It elevates one to the highest perfectional stage.
[3.13.49 tasmin prasanne sakalásisám       prabhau...]
3.   The Lord will take them beyond birth and death.
[3.25.39-40 imam lokarh       tathaivámum...]
4.   Devotees don't have desire for Satyaloka, asta-siddhis or even Vaikuntha but still
the Lord awards them His own abode.
[3.25.37 atho vibhütim mama máyávinas             tám...]
Liberation
5.   Inspite of their unwillingness, devotees             attain liberation without separate
endeavor.
[3.25.36 tair darsaniyávayavair      uddra...]
6.   Makes it possible to advance in knowiedge and detachment as well as in self
realization.
[3.32.23 vásudeve bhagavati       bhakti-yogah...]
17,,
Thematic Compilations
Transcendental opulences
7. Time cannot destroy the transcendental opulences that the devotees receive.
[3.25.38 na karhicin mat-paráh          sánta-rüpe...]
8. Nothing is impossible for one tvho has taken shelter of the Lord.
[3.23.42 kim durdpádanarh         tesám...]
Love for the Lord
9. One surpasses the three gunas and attains premá for the Lord.
[3.29.14 sa eva      bhakti-yogákhya...]
10. The Lord is never separated from the lotuses of the hearts' of devotees.
[3.9.5 ye tu         tvadiya-caranámbuja-kosa-gandham...]
11. Quickly dissolves the subtle body (matériái) of living entities without any separate
effort.
[3.25.33 jarayaty asu ya kosath...]
12. By hearing about       Lord's qualities mind flows continuously to the            Lord
unobstructed. Such bhakti is causeless and uninterrupted.
[3.29.11       mad-guna-sruti-mátrena...]
13. By hearing about the Lord's qualities mind flows continuously to the Lord
unobstructed. Such bhakti is causeless and uninterrupted.
[3.29.11       mad-guna-sruti-mátrena...]
14. Hearing krsna-kathá     in the association of devotees will give ruci, ásakti,    bháva
and premá.
[3.25.25 satám prasangan mama                virya-sathvido...]
BEST PROCESS
15. Perfection in self-realization cannot be attained unless one engages in bhakti.
[3.25.19 na yujyamánayá       bhaktyd...]
16. There is no greater person than he who has no interest outside of the Lord.
[3.29.33 tasmán mayy        arpitásesa...]
17. The Supreme Lord is perceived only through unfailing devotional service.
[3.24.43 mano brahmani         yuhjáno...]
18. Tivra bhakti is the only means for attainment of the final perfection of life.
[3.25.44 etáván eva loke 'smin...]
1. Glories of Bhakti Yoga
R E M O V E S MiSERIES
19. As long as people of this matériái world do not take shelter of Your Lotus feet
they are full of matériái anxieties.
[3.9.6 tavad bhayarh       dravina-deha-suhrn-nimittam...]
20. It delivers one from all matériái pangs.
[3.13.50 ko náma loke        purusártha-sáravit...]
21. There is never any question of frustration.
[3.21.24 na vai játu mrsaiva       syát...]
22. Devotee was never put into three fold miseries.
[3.22.37 sárirá mánasá      divyá...]
23. The sadhus do not suffer from matériái miseries
[3.25.23 mad-ásrayáh     kathá      mrstáh...]
BHAKTI Y O G A V S MATERIALISTIC PATH
24. Devotee finds it easy to seek Lord's protection but unrighteous person finds it
difficult.
[3.19.36 tam sukhárádhyam          rjubhir...]
25. One who fails to please the Lord, certainly neglects his own self-interest.
[3.13.13 yesám na tusto      bhagaván...]
26. Devotees can only put faith in Lord Krsna's transcendental sense activities, not
those who are under the control of super natural force.
[3.3.23 daivádhinesu     kamesu...]
27. Anyone whose work, religious ritualistic performance and renunciation does not
lead to bhakti must be considered dead, although he is breathing.
[3.23.56 néha yat karma          dharmáya...]
BHAKTI Y O G A V S ASTANGA Y O G A
Astanga Yoga requires Bhakti as the element for success
28. Always mérged in devotional service, the astánga-yogi                 visualizes the Lord
standing, moving, lying down or sitting within him.
[3.28.19 sthitam vrajantam         ásinam...]
Thematic
29. Worshipers of the virat-rupa don't get liberation if they don't possess bhakti.
[3.32.10.15 evath paretya bhagavantam                anupravistd...]
30. Bhakti is easy to perform, but other processes (jnanis and yogis) invoive lot of
pain.
[3.5.47 tathápare        cátma-samádhi-yoga-...]
31. The four Kumáras transformed from impersonaiism to personalism by smelling
the aroma of tulasi from the Lord's Lotus feet.
[3.15.43 tasyáravinda-nayanasya            padáravinda...]
32. Lither by bhakti or by philosophical research one has to find same destination (as
Bhagaván and Brahman, which is nothing but the bodily effulgence of the Lord)
[3.32.32 jnána-yogas     ca   man-nistho...]
Jnána Yoga requires Bhakti as the element for success
33. For a jnáni to attain impersonal Brahman (pratyag átmá) developing bhakti is an
element.
[3.25.27 asevayáyarh     prakrter      gunánám...]
34. Process of jndna involves engaging in bhakti with the faith that the Lord is real.
[3.27.6   yamádibhir      yoga-pathair...      mayi        bhávena     satyena   mat-kathá-
sravanena ca]
B H A K T I V S IMPERSONAL LÍBERATION
35. Bhakti performed without motives on a spontaneous levél (bháva) is superior to
liberation.
36. [3.25.32 devánám guna-lingánám               ánusravika-karmanám...]
37. Devotees never desire to become one with the Lord.
38. [3.25.34 naikátmatám       me sprhayanti     kecin...]
39. Devotees don't accept five kinds of liberation even though they are offered by the
Lord.
40. [3.29.13      sálokya-sársti-sámipya...]
2 . GLORIES O F KRSNA-KATHÁ
The glorification of the transcendental pastimes and activities of the Lord are found
throughout all the cantos of Srimad-Bhágavatam. The magnificent effects of hearing
and speaking Krsna kathá are repeatedly reminded to the reader of the Bhágavatam
through the realizations of various devotees conversing on the topics of Krsna in the
Bhágavatam. Because the glories of Krsna-kathá are unlimited, there can't be any
limit to the number of times they appear throughout this glorious text. The following
is a list of jewel-like verses, duly captioned, from the third canto, glorifying Krsna-
kathá. The context and elaborate understanding of these verses may be obtained
from the originál text.
N o SATIATION
1.   Because, Krsna kathá cut the knots of bondage.
[3.5.11 kas trpnuyát ttrtha-pado       'bhidhándt...]
2.   So, please speak more Krsna-kathá to the faitbful devotees.
[3.14.4 sraddadhdndya      bhaktdya...]
3.   What sort of devotee can be satiated by hearing the nectarean Krsna-kathá?
[3.20.6 td nah kirtaya bhadrath te            kirtanyodára-karmanah...]
4.   Transcendental birds in Vaikuntha stop their own singing simply to hear singing
of the bee that resembles Krsna-kathá.
[3.15.18        párávatányabhrta-sdrasa-cakraváka...]
5. Vaikuntha-vásis eternally sing krsna-kathá            and even deride the presence of
Mádhavi that are fragrant and laden with honey.
[3.15.17 vaimánikáh   sa-lalanás   caritáni    sasvad...]
6.   Kumáras pray to be born anywhere as long as they can hear and chant about the
Lord.
[3.15.49 kámath bhavah sva-vrjinair      nirayesu nah      stác...]
I m '
->1**X
7. Intoxicating and nectarean Krsna-kathá in the association of devotes frees one
from the primary necessities of the matériái body.
[3.21.17 lokárits ca...           tvad-guna-vdda-sidhu-piyüsa-nirydpita-deha-dharmáh]
V A N Q U I S H E S MISERIES A N D G R A N T S BLISS
8.   Increases one's indifference towards all external things and enables one achieve
transcendental bliss by vanquishing all the miseries without delay.
[3.5.13 sá sraddadhdnasya           vivardhamdná...]
9. Hearing leads to cessation of unlimited miseries, what to speak of service!
[3.7.14 asesa-sanklesa-samarh         vidhatte...]
10. Gives transcendental bliss if heard from authoritative source.
[3.19.33 iti kausáravákhyátdm        ásrutya      bhagavat-kathdm...]
11. Gives transcendental pleasure.
[3.19.34 anyesdm punya-slokdndm udddma-yasasám                    satám...]
12. Constantly chanting and hearing vanquishes suffering from matériái miseries,
since one's thoughts dwell in the Lord.
[3.25.23 mad-ásrayáh      kathá mrstáh srnvanti kathayanti ca...]
13. Krsna-kathá is the essence of all topics and alone can do good for all people.
[3.5.15 tad asya kausárava     sarma-dátur      hareh kathám eva kathásu      saram...]
14. Bhágavatam    is spoken for the benefit of miserable people.
[3.8.2 so 'ham nrnárh ksulla-sukháya          duhkham...]
15. Lord's topics are nectarean and can deliver one from all matériái pangs.
[3.13.50 ko náma loke        purusártha-sáravit...]
IGHEST P E R F E C T I O N                 '^^^^^^^^^^^F^
16. The highest perfectional gain of humanity.
[3.6.37 ekánta-lábharh    vacaso nu      purhsárh...]
17. Mind's attraction to Krsna kathá manifests unadulterated bhakti like the Canges
naturally flowing down towards the ocean.
[3.29.11-12 mad-guna-sruti-mátrena         mayi     sarva-guhasaye...]
18. Lord is never separated from the lotus of devotees' hearts, who hear about H i m .
[3.9.5 ye tu        tvadiya-caranámbuja-kosa-gandharh...]
19. If one hears and describes about Lord Boar, the Lord will be very pleased.
[3.13.48 ya evam etárh hari-medhaso           hareh...]
r^Sríjk'iJlT'áí                                                         2. Glories Of Krsna-Kathá
-      c?'.!zA^^~*'*:AÍ^                          Qjjjjjjjjjjjjjjj^^
20. Source of liberation from the chain of birth and death.
[3.14.5 sádhu vtra tvayd prstam avatára-kathám                    hareh...]
LORD'S GLORIES ENHANCE DEVOTEE'S GLORIES
21. Persons with meager austerity can hardly obtain service of the pure devotees, who
engage in     krsna-kathá.
[3.7.20 durápá hy alpa-tapasah...]
11. The goal of a person engaged in hearing from spiritual master is to hear about
pure devotees who always think of Lord who awards liberation.
[3.13.4 srutasya pumsáni          sucira-sramasya...]
23. Lord's glory is always worth singing, for His glories enhance the glories of His
devotees.
[3.28.18 kírtanya-tirtha-yasasath                  punya-sloka-yasaskaram...]
FREES O N E O F A L L SINS
24. One who chants holy name even unconsciously is freed from the sins of all ages.
[3.9.15          yasyávatára-guna-karma-vidambanáni...]
25. Hearing is exactly like bathing in Ganges water, for it can free one from all sinful
reactions.
[3.20.5 tayoh samvadatoh süta pravrttá hy amaláh                      katháh...]
26. Though low born, glorious are those whose tongues chant Lord's holy name!
[3.33.7 aho bata sva-paco 'to gariyán yaj-jihvágre                 vartate náma       tubhyam...]
CLEANSES T H E H E A R T
27. Devotees see the Lord through ears by the process of                    krsna-kathá.
[3.9.11 tvam             bhakti-yoga-paribhávita-hrt-saroja...]
CAUSELESS M E R C Y O F T H E L O R D
28. A devotee's chanting of the Lord's glories, his penances and firm faith in the Lord
is the Lord's causeless mercy.
[3.9.38 yac cakarthánga          mat-stotram...]
ÍISULT O F H É A R Í N G AND CHAÍSÍTING
Attains Vaikuntha
29. By hearing about Lord, Dhruva was enlightened about Lord and went to
Vaikuntha.
[3.14.6 yayottdnapadah       putro...]
30. Persons whose bodily features change in ecstasy and who breathe heavily and
perspire due to hearing krsna-katha are promoted to the kingdom of God.
[3.15.25 yac ca vrajanty animisdm            rsabhánuvrttyd...]
31. Achieve the complete meaning of renunciation and knowiedge and attain the
Vaikuntha.
[3.5.46 pánena te deva        kathá-sudháyáh...]
32. Anyone who hears or reads about Lord Kapila becomes devotee and thereafter
enters the abode of the Lord.
[3.33.37 ya idam anusrnoti yo 'bhidhatte...]
Purification
33. Lven the dog eaters who hear Lord's name will immediately get purified.
[3.16.6       yasyámrtámala-yasah-sravanávagáhah...]
34. Lven a dog-eater can immediately become a bráhmana,                  ií he once utters Lord's
holy name or chants or hears about the Lord.
[3.33.6 yan-námadheya-sravanánukirtanád             ...]
35. Power of speaking will be purified otherwise it would remain unchaste.
[3.6.36 tathápi kirtayámy     anga...]
Líberation
36. By devotional service one gets free of all matériái contamination and attains
liberation.
[3.33.24 animitta-nimittena              sva-dharmenámalátmaná...]
37. One at once becomes enlightened with knowiedge and detachment.
[3.5.42 yac chraddhayá      srutavatyd ca bhaktyd...]
Result of not Hearing and Chanting
38. One who gives up the topics of Vaikuntha and take to the talk of the matériái
world are thrown into the darkest region of ignorance.
[3.15.23 yan na vrajanty agha-bhido             racanánuvádác...]
•ÓT!r't2jMÍ)í''§^^                                            2. Glories Of Krsna-Kathá
Do Not Even Care For Liberation
39. Experts engage in Krsna kathá, and do not care for the highest matériái
henedictions like liberation.
[3.15.48 nátyantikarh       viganayanty api te    prasádath...]
Hearing in Association of Devotees
40. Hearing krsna-kathá     in the association of devotees is satisfying to the ear and the
heart.
[3.25.25 satáth prasangán       mama     virya-sathvido...]
Superior to Otber Processes
41. Attain faith by yama, niyama and elevate to bhakti by chanting and hearing.
[3.27.6 yamádibhir        yoga-pathair abhyasah       sraddhayánvitah...]
42. Those interested in dharma, artha and kama are averse to             krsna-kathá.
[3.32.18 trai-vargikás     te purusá vimukhá     hari-medhasah...]
[3.32.19 nünarh daivena vihatá ye          cdcyuta-kathá-sudhám...]
Thematic Compilations   ;í^|ÍÍC03ICC:SCl^^^^^
The lotus feet of the Supreme Lord are always adored by H i s loving devotees. Since
the devotees apply all their energy and their activities in the service of the Lord's lotus
feet, there must be somé transcendental pleasure in them. Sometimes the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Himself wonders how much transcendental pleasure is
within Himself, so much so that He licks His own toe just to taste the nectar for
which the devotees always hankering. The following are somé beautiful verses from
the Third Canto that reveal various glories of the Lord's lotus feet and inspite us to
take shelter of them with more zeal.
BEAUTY
1.   Adorned with the marks of a thunderbolt, a goad, a banner and a lotus.
Splendor of ruby naiis
2. Moonlike toenails and fingernails appear like the petals of a flower.
[3.8.26 puthsárh     sva-kámáya...]
3.   Resembles the orb of the moon and dispels the thick gloom of one's heart.
[3.28.21 sancintayed bhagavatas       caranáravindam...]
FuLFiLLER O F A L L DESIRES
4.   Gives anything within the realm of dharma, artha, káma and moksa. [3.4.15]
5. True vessél to cross samsára    [bhava-sindhu-potam].   Lven bestows matériái desires
for who pray for them. [3.21.14 ye máyayá te hata-medhasas       tvat...]
6. The Lord's lotus feet are the source of everything. [3.21.15]
3. The Lord's Lotus Feet
A W A R D S DIFFERENT QUALITIES
7.   One at once becomes enlightened with knowiedge and detachment. We must
therefore take shelter of the sanctuary of Lord's lotus feet [3.5.42 ...te               'nghri-
saroja-pitham].
8. The Lord's lotus feet award remembrance and courage to devotees. [3.5.43]
9. The blessed Lord Siva becomes all the more blessed by bearing on his head the
holy water that washed the Lord's lotus feet. [3.28.22              yac-chauca-nihsrta-sarit...]
PLACE O F PILGRIMAGE
10. Sum totál of all places of pilgrimage (tirtha-pada).        [3.5.11]
11. The great clear-minded sages surrender to them at every step by taking shelter of
the Ganges. [3.5.41 márganti yat te ... tirtha-padah          prapannáh]
12. The water of the Ganges is the remnant left after the Lord's feet are washed. It
sanctifies the three worlds, along with lord Siva, who bears it on his head. [3.16.9.
sadyah pundti saha candra laláma       lokán]
S O U R C E O F TRANSCENDENTAL BLISS
13. When the breeze carrying the aroma of tulasi leaves from the toes of the Lord's
lotus feet entered the nostrils of those sages, they experienced a change both in
the body and in the mind. [3.15.43          tasyáravinda-nayanasya...]
14. Who, after smelling the dust of His lotus feet even once, could ever forget it?
[3.2.18 ko vá amusyánghri-saroja-renurh           vismartum...]
B E S T O W S D E V O T I O N A L SERVICE
15. Source of all awards achieved by devotional service free from matériái
contamination. [3.8.26 purhsám         sva-kámáya...]
16. The Lord is never separated from the hearts of devotees who smell through the
ears, the aroma of His lotus feet, carried by the air of Vedic sound and accept
those feet as the greatest treasure. [3.9.5 ye tu                     tvadiya-caranámbuja-kosa-
gandharh...]
17. Worth worshiping (bhajaniya-padámbujam)              [3.32.22]
18. Meditation on lotus feet acts like thunderbolts hurled to shatter the mountain of
sin. [3.28.22 yac-chauca-nihsrta            ...]
19. Dust of Lord's lotus feet [carana-padma-pavitra-renum]                       are so sacred that they
wipe out all sin. [3.16.7]
RELIEVES F R O M MISERIES
20. Vanquishes all miseries without delay. [3.5.13 sá                    sraddadhánasya...]
21. Like an umbrella, protect the devotees from all the matériái miseries. [3.5.39]
22. Attachment to the service to the flavor of the dust of the Lord's lotus feet relieves
all miseries. [3.7.14               ...tac-caranáravinda-parága-sevá-ratir...]
23. People who are suffering take shelter of the shade of Lord's lotus feet                         [tavánghri-
ccháyáth],    which are full of knowiedge. [3.5.40]
24. Gajendra was saved when he meditated upon the Lord's lotus feet. [3.19.35]
25. What is difficult to achieve for determined men who have taken refuge of the
Lord's lotus feet? His feet put an end to the dangers of mundane life. [3.23.42]
W H O C A N N O T SEE T H E L O R D ' S L O T U S F E E T
26. Persons who are bound by thoughts of "mine" and " I " [3.5.44]
27. Offensive persons who are affected by materialistic activities [3.5.45]
28. The Lord is capabie of ending the affiiction of the distressed and inflicting agony
on those who never resort to His feet. [3.20.27]
V A R I O U S D E V O T E E S D E S I R I N G T Ő T A K E SHELTER O F L O R D ' S L O T U S F E E T
29. Uddhava: I prefer to engage only in the loving service of Your lotus feet. [3.4.15]
30. Brahmá: Let me take shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord. [3.9.15]
31. Great Sages: His feet are sought for by recluses and great sages. [3.15.37]
32. Kumáras: 'Let us be born in any hell, as long as we remember Lord's feet.'
[3.15.49]
33. Laksmi is anxious to secure a place in the abode of the king of bees, who hovers
on the wreath of tulasi leaves offered at the Lord's feet a blessed devotee.
[3.16.20]
3. The Lord's Lotus Feet
34. Kardama: it is worthy to take shelter of Your lotus feet, because You shower all
henedictions on the insignificant. [3.21.21]
Your lotus feet are the reservoir that always deserves to receive worshipful
homage from all great sages and I surrender unto them. [3.24.32]
35. Mature yogis, after many births, by complete trance in yoga, endeavor in
secluded places to see the Lord's lotus feet. [3.24.28]
36. Devahüti: I have taken shelter of Your lotus feet because Y o u are the only person
of whom to take shelter. [3.25.11]
What kind of devotional service is worth developing and practicing to help me
easily and immediately attain the service of Your lotus feet? [3.25.28]
37. J i v a in womb: I take shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord, who appears in His
eternal forms and walks on the surface of the world. [3.31.12]
Simply by keeping the lotus feet of Lord Visnu in my mind, I shall be saved from
entering into the wombs of many mothers for repeated birth and death. [3.31.21]
Srimad-Bhagavatam is a coUection of conversations amongst pure hearted devotees
like - Sukadeva Goswámi and Pariksit Mahárája, Süta Gosvámi and Saunakádi Rsis,
Maitreya and Vidura, etc. Along with the contents of these conversations, it's a great
learning experience to look at the wonderful mood and attitűdé of the speakers and
hearers, and the consciousness with which they discuss krsna-kathá. A speaker of
Srimad-Bhágavatam     must be authoritative and competent in conveying its real
meaning, having personally realized the subject matter. And to receive this Vedic
knowiedge, one must approach a spiritual master with submission, inquire in a
humhle mood and hear the expianations attentively. Following are somé examples
from the Third Canto that inspite us in out hearing and speaking of krsna-kathá.
iDEAL SPEAKERS
Uddhava
• Attacbed to the Lord - Upon being questioned, he could initially not speak due
to the ecstasy in remembering Lord Krsna. (3.2.1)
• Great devotee - Constant companion of Lord Krsna (3.1.25), assimilated love of
God. (3.2.5)
• Learned - Great student of Brhaspati. (3.1.25)
• Authoritative - Received knowiedge from the Supreme Lord. (3.4.20)
• Surrendered - FoUowed Krsna's instructions to go to Badarikásrama. (3.4.21)
• Etiquette - Requested Vidura to take instruction from Maitreya instead of
himself, being junior to Maitreya (maryádá-vyatikrama). (3.4.26)
Maitreya
• Learned - He was a sage of unfathomed knowiedge (3.5.1)
• Appreciative - Praises Vidura's qualities and enquiries (3.5.18-21, 3.8.1, 3.14.5)
• Honest - " I described whatever I was able to understand and assimilate."
(3.6.36)
M   I   1     1    £    »    T    £    »   T    £    1    M
íí     l»ti f i 'tAl*   A, 4AJ' f   I               4. Spirit of Bhágavatam Speaker and Hearer
• Chaste speech - Maitreya says that his speech will only he pure if he uses it to
glorify the Lord. (3.6.36)
• Analytical - Somé people claim that the Supreme Lord can be overcome by maya
and at the same time remain unconditioned. This is against all logic. (3.7.9)
• Enlivened - Maitreya smiled at Vidura and spoke on the activities of the Lord
with great enthusiasm and joy. (3.7.42).
• Authoritative - Speaks on the subject matter according to parampard. (3.8.2-9)
• Cites authorities -             Quoted narration between Brahmá and the Demigods.
(3.14.7)
Lord Kapila
• Comprehensive teacher - Lord Kapila's teachings cover sdnkhya, astanga, jndna
and bhakti.
• Conclusive - Shows the conclusion of knowiedge, tattva-mdrgdgra-darsanam.
(3.25.6)
• Cite authorities - " I will explain to you the ancient yoga system, which has been
taught to great Sages." (3.25.14)
• Explains bhakti i n relation to the other paths - Lord Kapila discusses all yoga
paths and their positions in relation to bhakti. (3.25.14,19,43, 3.32.22-27)
• Uses analogíes - Expianations are easily understood through analogies. (3.25.33,
3.27.12-13)
iDEAL HEARERS
Vidura
• Faithful inquiry - Upon Uddhava's departure, Vidura questions him with great
affection and confidence. (3.4.24)
• Purposeful questions - Vidura's questions to Maitreya must have been very
purposeful, on the highest levél, and approved by learned circles. (3.1.4)
• Progressive - Vidura's first questions to Maitreya are not about the Lord but
about subject matters important for the common man. (3.5.2 P)
• Benefitting to others - People are entangled in fruitive activities. Please give
directions for them to attain happiness. (3.5.2)
• Eagerness - Vidura wants to know about the Lord's purusdvatdras,            lilávatdras,
vírát-rüpa, and many other topics. (3.5.5-8, 3.7, 3.13.3-4, 3.14.1, 3.14.4)
• Focused - Subject matters lesser than the topics of Krsna do not give satisfaction.
(3.5.10, 3.7.40)
Thematic Compilations   S ' t l j j íJj^ír^Sí^^^^
• Glorifies the teacher - Compares Maitreya to one of the auspicious devotees
that travel the world just to enlighten the ignorant. (3.5.3, 3.7.41, 3.11.17)
• Glorifies the process - By hearing the topics of the Lord, one develops distaste
for other topics. (3.5.13)
• Essence seeking - Like bees collect honey from flowers, kindly describe the
essence of all topics (kathásu saram), namely hari-kathá. (3.5.15)
• Absorbed - Mind is absorbed in thoughts of the Lord (3.5.18), and in the words
of Maitreya. (3.7.15)
• Reveals doubts - Kindly eradicate my doubts (3.7.1, 3.7.7, 3.10.2)
• Pleasing Inquires - With sweet words (bháratyá), spoken in a pleasing manner
(prinayan), he requests Maitreya to resolve his doubts. (3.7.1)
• Reaffirmation - Implores Maitreya's descriptions to be very accurate and then
presents his own understanding of the topic. (3.7.16)
• Grateful - Y o u have convinced me that this world is unreal, therefore I am
obliged to sérve you. (3.7.18)
Devahüti
• Unhesitant inquiry - Devahüti questions Lord Kapila for enlightenment even
though He is her own son. (3.25.6)
• Dependent - You have given me transcendental vision and Y o u are my only
means to get out of ignorance. (3.25.8)
• H u m i l i t y - I am having the misconceptions of " I and mine" (3.25.10), so please
explain everything in an easily understood manner. (3.25.30)
• Reflective - She asks to hear about samsara because it will help her to become
detacbed from the matériái world. (3.29.3)
• Contemplative - She says - can matériái nature ever give release to the spirit
soul? There is an eternal attraction between them. (3.27.17)
• Analytical - If one doesn't destroy the root cause of samsara, how can it go
away? (3.27.20)
Maitreya Rsi
• Pleasing attitűdé - Maitreya was greatly attacbed to Krsna, and he was listening
in a pleasing attitűdé, with his shoulder lowered. (3.4.10)
Uddhava
• Humhle - Please give me knowiedge of your transcendental situation if you think
we are competent and qualified to hear. (3.4.18)
In difficulty, doubt or overwhelming love, faithful devotees express themselves to the
Supreme Lord in prayer and glorification. The following table gives a bird's eye view
of the prayers offered by various devotees mentioned in Canto Three. Please refer to
the detailed overview of these prayers in the Overview section of this hook.
Prayers          Situation         Purpose           Theme              Result
1   Uddhava to       When Lord         Due to feeling    Your pastimes      The Lord explained
Lord Krsna       Krsna was         separation        are bewildering,   His transcendental
[3.4.15-18]      about to leave    from the Lord     kindly explain     situation {paramdm
the world         and asking        the knowiedge      sthitim)
Him for           You gave to
knowiedge         Brahmá
2   Deities of the   Unable to         To be able to     Your lotus feet    The Lord sent His
Elements to      perform their     rendet their      will remove all    cohesive energy to
Mahá Visnu       Services in the   services in the   obstacles          bind them and later
[3.5.39-51]      creation due to   creation of the                      He entered and
their being       universe                             manifested the
unmixed                                                universal lotus and
Brahmá
3   Brahmá to        After             To be able to     Glorification of   The Lord was
the Supreme      performing        carry out the     the Lord and       pleased, spoke to
Lord [3.9.1-     tapasya and       creation          bhakti. Then       Brahmá and
2]               obtaining         successfully      request for a      empowered him
Lord's darsana                      benediction
4   Sages to         When He lifted To pay their         Lord Varáha's    Lord placed the
Lord Varába      the earth      obeisances to        body as the form earth on the water
[3.13.34-45]                    the Lord and         of sacrif ice    and departed for
glorify Him.                          His abode
Thematic Compilations      I S O Í ^ I Í Í Í O Í I C Í ^ ^
Prayers        Situation         Purpose          Theme               Result
5    Demigods to    When there      To know the        You know            Brahmá explained
lord Brahmá    was darkness in cause of the       everything          the incident of the
[3.15.3-10]    the universe    darkness that                          Kumáras cursing
due to Diti's   was spreading                          Jaya and Vijaya
pregnancy       throughout the
universe
6    Kumáras to     When the Lord     Paid their       By Your mercy       The Lord
Lord Visnu     gave darsana at   obeisances       we hecame           reconciled the
[3.15.46-50]   the gate of       after seeing the devotees            situation
Vaikuntha         Lord
7    Kumáras to     After the Lord    To understand    Because of You
Lord Visnu     spoke             and to please    brdhmanas are
[3.16.16-25]   apologetically    the Lord         glorified
8    Brahmá to      To kill           They desired     It is the right     The Lord killed
Varáhadeva     Hiranyáksa        his death        time to kill him    Hiranyáksa
[3.18.20-28]                     immediately
9    Kardama to     After the Lord    To get a         Supreme Lord        The Lord arranged
the Lord       gave darsana      suitable wife    and His various     for Devahüti as a
Visnu                                             worshipers          good match
[3.21.13-21]
10   Kardama to     When he was       Out of           By Your mercy       The Lord spoke
Lord Kapila    leaving home      gratitude,       You appeared        and promised him
[3.24.27-34]                     seeking Lord's   even in our         success
permission to    homes
renounce
11   Devahüti to    After Kardama To get rid of        You are like a      The Lord gave His
Lord Kapila    Muni left home matériái            boát, the sun and   teachings to dispel
[3.25.7-11]                   existence           an axe to help      her illusion (to the
me cross the        world through her)
matériái world
12   Devotee jiva   When he was       Being unable to I take shelter of
to the Lord    entrapped in      tolerate        You
[3.31.12-21]   mother's the      suffering, he
womb              prayed
13   Devahüti to    After             Out of           You descend to  The Lord was
Lord Kapila    Kapiladeva        gratitude        disseminate     pleased
[3.33.2-8]     teaches her                        knowiedge, one
who chants Your
holy name is
purified
Reversais come in everyone's life. A devotee is no exception. However, the difference
between a devotee and materialistic person is in the way they respond to a reversal.
The following are the examples of personalities (from third canto) whose response to
the reversais gives us great lessons. Srila Prabhupada's comments are also added to
better understand and appreciate them.
Reversal                                         Comment/ Lessen
Vidura     Debarred: Insulted     He considered the acts   A devotee sees the hand of the
and banished from      of the Lord's maya to    Lord (via different energies) in
the kingdom by         be supreme and went      all situations [3.1.16 P]
Duryodhana             on pilgrimage
[3.1.15]
Brahma     Disappointment:        He concentrated his      To cease from personal sense
He could not trace     mind on the Supreme      endeavors and to concentrate on
out the root of the    Lord.                    the supreme cause is a sign of
universal lotus stem                            self-surrender, and when self-
[3.8.21]                                        surrender is present, that is a
sure sign of devotional service,
which leads to understanding the
Lord [3.8.21 P]
Brahmá     Dissatisfaction:       He purified himself by   As an obedient servitor of the
Brahmá created five    meditating on the Lord   Lord, Brahmá creates all these as
kinds of nescience,    and created the          a matter of necessity, but he is
but seeing such a      Kumáras and entrusted    not happy in doing so because a
misleading creation    them the four            devotee of the Lord naturally
as a sinful task, he   principles of vidya.     does not like to see anyone
was dissatisfied.                               falling down from his real
[3.12.2-3]                                      position. [3.12.3 P]
Thematic Compilations
Person         Reversal               Response                 Comment/ Lesson
Brahma    Disobedience: He       Although He tried to    Although the Kumáras were
created the four       control, anger          right in such acts of refusal,
Kumáras to             generated in his mind   Brahmá, being absorbed in the
populate the           and from between his    mode of passión, could not ;
universe but they      eyebrows Rúdra          check his passionate anger. He
refused [3.12.5]       appeared.               did not express it, however,
because he knew that his sons j
were far enlightened in spiritual I
advancement. [3.12.6 P]
Brahma    Disturbance:           Brahmá asked Rúdra      Rúdra was advised not to
Rudra's progeny        to stop generating      destroy while the period of         =
were all ghostly       living entities and     creation and maintenance was         S
personalities, who     engage in penance.      going on, but to situate himself    j
began to destroy                               in penance and wait for the time    j
the creation and                               of dissolution, when his services
even attack Brahmá                             would be called for. [3.12.18 P]
[3.12.14]
Brahma    Distraction by Vak     Gave up that body       Brahmá was obliged to give up
[3.12.28]              (mentality)             his body, even though he had
merely contemplated it in his
mind without having actually
done it. [3.12.13 P]
Brahmá    Deficiency: In spite   He was thus absorbed    While he was contemplating,
of the presence of     in contemplation and    Manu and Satarüpá were
sages of great         was observing the       generated from his body.
potency there was      supernatural power.
no sufficient
increase in
population
[3.12.50-51]
Brahmá     Disruption: The       He approached the       Whenever one fully surrenders |
lustful demons        Lord and being          unto the Supreme Lord, He can |
wanted to copulate    ordered by Him,         give US direction how to get out
with Brahmá           Brahmá cast off his     of dangers. The Lord asked
[3.20.23]             body (mentality)        Brahmá to give up his present
body because it had created the
demoniac principle. [3.20.28 P]
'&'tV^t2fÍt'&'t^^^^                                            6. Reversais
Person         Reversal               Response                 Comment/ Lesson
Diti        Deviation: Due to     She repented her        Because of her lamentation,
sex at an             mistake and, although   repentance        and       proper
inauspicious time,    her sons were to        deliberation, faith in the Lord
two demons were       become demons, her      and her adoration of Lord Siva
to be born from her   grandson would be the   and Kasyapa, she got that
womb [3.14]           great devotee,          benediction that gave somé
Prahláda [3.14.33-36]   solace to her. [3.14.44-45]
Jaya and    Cursed: by the four   They accepted the       The Lord said, "By practicing
Vijaya      Kumáras to take       curse but prayed that   the mystic yoga system in anger,
birth as demons in    they never forget the   you will be cleansed of the sin of
the matériái world    Lord during their       disobeying the bráhmanas and
[3.15.34]             absence [3.15.36]       within a very short time return
to Me." [3.16.31]
Devahuti    Distressed: Her       She asks him for        Lord Kapila enlightened her and
husband, Kardama,     fearlessness. Kardama   finally she achieved the Lord.
leaving home and      telis her that Lord     [3.33.30]
taking sannyüsa       Kapila will soon
[3.23.52]             appear in her womb.
An important theme in the Srimad-Bhágavatam concerns the feelings of sadness
expressed by the devotees when their beloved Lord is not present. Actually such
feelings of separation are completely transcendental. The devotees constantly relish
qualities. Because He is Absolute, there is no difference between meeting H i m
directly and remembering H i m in separation.
The third canto presents wonderful examples of these moods in the characters of
Uddhava, Vidura, Devahüti and the two gatekeepers of Vaikuntha. Uddhava and
Vidura were both intimate associates of Krsna during His pastimes at the end of
Dvapara-yuga, and they both had to experience Krsna's sad departure (3.1-3). I n
these chapters Uddhava's feelings of love are beautifully described and Vidura's love
leads him to seek knowiedge about Krsna's pastimes from Maitreya Rsi. Jaya and
Vijaya experienced separation from the Lord, by being cursed to take three births as
demons. Devahüti had to suffer the absence of her son. Lord Kapila, who left home
after teaching her in transcendental science.
1.   Overwhelmed by Vidura's questions: Uddhava faints upon hearing Vidura's
inquiries about Krsna. (3.1.25 V )
2.   Unable to speak: Uddhava could not answer Vidura immediately due to the
intense pain upon remembering his dear Lord. (3.2.1)
3.   Motionless and dead silent: Going deeper and deeper into the ecstasy of love in
separation, while remembering the Lord's lotus feet, Uddhava remained blissful
and motionless. (3.2.4)
4.   Ecstatic symptoms: Goosebumps covered his entire body and tears of separation
flowed from his closed eyes and he completely assimilated extensive love for the
Lord. (3.2.5)
7. Feelings of Separation from the Lord
5. Remembered the gopis who were so stunned in separation of Krsna that they
couldn't perform their daily duties. (3.2.14)
6.   Narration of pastimes: T o mitigate their distresses of separation, Uddhava
recoliects many of Krsna's pastimes. (3.2-3)
7.   H e follows K r s n a although knowing H i s contrary desire: Despite knowing
Krsna's plan to destroy the Yadus, Uddhava could not leave H i m . (3.4.5)
8.   Heart pains in separation: Especially because the Lord had taught Uddhava in
self-knowledge, his heart now pained due to separation from H i m . (3.4.20)
9.   Service mitigates Separation: Uddhava was eager to proceed to Badarikásrama
and execute the instructions given to him by Krsna. (3.4.21)
10. News of Krsna's disappearance is unbearable: Vidura already knew about
Krsna's departure, but out of anguish he asks Uddhava again. (3.1.25 P)
11. Krsna-katha and K r s n a are the same: Vidura wants to remember Krsna through
Maitreya's expianations. (3.5.13 P)
12. Overwhelmed: Understanding that he was remembered by Lord Krsna [while
departing from this world], Vidura began to cry loudly, overwhelmed by the
ecstasy of love. (3.4.35)
JAYA A N D V I J A Y A
13. M a y we not forget the L o r d : Upon being cursed by the four Kumáras, the two
doorkeepers accepted their punishment, but expressed a deep desire to not forget
the Lord in their absence from Vaikuntha. (3.5.36)
14. Meditation in Anger: The Lord fulfilled their desires to always remember H i m ,
but becoming demons they will have to meditate in anger thus they will always
remain firmly united with the Lord despite their separation. (3.16.26)
DEVAHÜTI
15. She allows L o r d Kapila to leave: Knowing the truth about her son, Devahüti did
not mind H i m leaving, knowing that she would be protected by His will. (3.33.12
V)
Thematic Compilations
16. Follows instructions i n H i s absence: She remained alone at home and practiced
bhakti-yoga as instructed by her son. (3.33.13)
17. Intense feelings of separation i n vatsalya: First losing her husband and then her
son, she was aggrieved like a cow that has lost its calf. "Please bring my son
home so that I may live. Otherwise, I shall die." (3.33.21 P)
18. Detachment: Due to her meditation on the Lord in separation, she lost all
attachment for her beautiful home. (3.33.22)
19. Intense meditation: Through her intense meditation on the Lord's form, as
taught by her son, she gradually attained Bhagaván realization and returned to
the planet of Lord Kapila in the spiritual world. (3.33.30 P)
íBMMBMMMííiMMíMM^MBmMPM
8 . i D E A L HOUSEHOLD LIFE
The grhastha-ásrama,   or householder life, is considered the support for the entire
varnasrama system, considering that the other three orders -              brahmacdrl,
vdnaprastha and sannydsi - are dependent on them for personal maintenance. The
Third Canto portrays valuahle exemplary dealings and lessons for an ideal
householder based on the characters of Sváyambhuva Manu, Kardama Muni and
Devahüti, as well as Kasyapa Muni and Diti. The grhastha-dsrama is a life of sacrifice
and prime responsibilities. The following article presents points given in the
Bhdgavatam as well as from Srila Prabhupada's purports that highiight the principles
of the ideal grhastha-dsrama.
DEFINITIONS
1.   There are two kinds of householders - grhamedhi and grhastha. The objective of
the grhamedhi is sense gratification, and the objective of the grhastha is self-
realization. (3.32.1 P)
2.   Grhastha refers to one who lives with family, wife and children, hut whose real
purpose of living is to develop Krsna consciousness. (3.30.8 P)
1.   Household life should be conducted in such a way that one not go against the
principles of dharma, artha and kdma, but elevate oneself in Krsna consciousness.
(3.22.33 P)
Example: Manu enjoyed life according to dharma (3.22.33)
2.   T o lead a life of piety, follow the religious rules and regulations, marry and live
peacefuUy for elevation to the higher status of spiritual realization. (3.21.16 P)
MWmMMMMMWmMMMMWM
Thematic Compilations
3.   To give people in generál the best opportunity to utilize their humán life in the
midst of matériái enjoyment, by reguiating their habits of sense enjoyment.
(3.22.34 P)
4.   Generating good progeny under the blessings of advanced devotees. (3.21.6)
)UTiES O F AN IDEAL H O U S E H O L D E R •
1.   Enjoying worldly life without conflicting religion. (3.22.33)
2. To not spend time in vain but to contemplate, hear and chant about the pastimes
of the Lord. (3.22.35)
3.   The fame of a householder increases by getting their offspring married to a
suitable match. (3.24.15)
4. They should follow the purificatory process of garbhddhána-samskara      to produce
good progeny. (3.20.28 P)
5.   When the husband and wife aim at spiritual advancement by mutual cooperation
there will be no disruption in their relationship when sense gratification stops.
(3.14.19 P)
6. The grhastha is responsible for producing first-quality brahmacdris,    vdnaprasthas
and sannydsis. (3.14.20 P)
S E L E C T I N G T H E RiGHT S P O U S L
1.   One should select a wife of like disposition and not be enamored by so-called
heauty or other attractive features for sense gratification. (3.21.15 P)
2.   Consult with astrology. (3.21.15 P)
3.   Man and woman should be united based on character and taste, not on sex life.
(3.24.15 P)
4. A woman seeks a like-minded husband in terms of age, character and good
qualities. (3.21.27, 3.22.9)
5.   Only by God's grace can one get a nice suitable spouse. (3.21.28 P)
6.   Generally, men should be of a higher social order compared to wife, nevertheless
by special permission, the opposite is also possible. (3.21.28 P)
7. The boy's training is brahmacarya, and the girl's training is chastity. A faithful
wife and spiritually trained brahmacdrl are a good combination for advancement
of the humán mission. (3.14.17 P)
C M Í L    ,7é*7jf7**Tj|.7^t         t7i                    r,. idf.ii I loiNchold I ifc
SoME Q U A L I T I E S O F A G O O D W I F E
1.   The wife is accepted as the better half of a man's body because she is supposed to
be responsible for discharging half of the husband's duties. (3.14.19 P)
2. The wife is dependent on the husband, and if the husband is a 'Vaisnava, then
naturally she shares the devotional service of the husband because she renders
him service. (3.23.1 P)
3. A wife serves her husband with intimacy and great respect, with control of the
senses, with love and with sweet words, understanding the husband's desires.
(3.23.2)
4.   A faithful and chaste wife helps her husband in every respect, especially when the
husband is engaged in Krsna consciousness. (3.23.6 P)
SoME Q U A L I T I E S O F A G O O D H U S B A N D       '
1.   The husband should be enlightened and become the spiritual master of the wife.
(3.24.5 P)
2.   The husband has to renounce household life at the proper time. (3.23.3)
3. A n ideal husband is not in the sense of riches or sense gratification, but is in the
sense of being a devotee {Example: Lord Siva) (3.23.1 P)
4.   It is the responsibility of the husband to give his wife fearlessness. (3.23.51 P)
5.   He must also provide all comforts to the wife, but not become materially
attacbed. (3.33.19 P)
Thematic Compilations   ^féfl^fifkiféí^t^éí^t^^^^
The baseline of devotional practice is obedience - to the Lord, to His devotees and to
the process of devotional service. Obedience is foUowed not just by accepting an
order, but also in executing it and the overall mood that one carries throughout.
Although seemingly a tough pill to swallow for most, practicing obedience is made
easier by the exemplary characters of devotees found in the Bhágavatam as well as
the enlightening instruction given by Srila Prabhupáda in his purports. This
compilation attempts to present relevant case studies, principles and lessons of
obedience presented in the third canto.
C A S E STUDIES
1 . Kardama Muni to Brahmá
Kardama Muni was instructed to populate the world by his father, lord Brahmá. I n
lieu of that command, he practiced penance on the bank of the River Sarasvati for a
period of 10,000 years (3.21.6) and satisfied Lord Visnu. After he begets ten children,
lord Brahmá appears and expresses his heart to Kardama, saying "Since you have
completely accepted my instructions without duplicity, showing them proper respect,
you have worshiped me properly, and thereby honored me." (3.24.12)
2. Sváyambhuva Manu to Brahmá
The father of mankind, Manu prayed to Brahmá, "Please order us how we may be
able to rendet service unto y o u . " (3.13.7) "Please give us your direction for the
execution of duty within our working capacity so that we can follow it for fame in
this life and progress in the next." (3.13.8)
Lord Brahmá replied, " M y dear son, O lord of the world, I am very pleased with you,
and I desire all blessings for both you and your wife. Y o u have without reservation
surrendered yourself unto me with your heart for my instructions (3.13.9). Manu
replies, " O all-powerful lord, O killer of all sins, I shall abide by your order."
(3.13.14)
3. Rúdra to Brahmá
When Rúdra was generated, he began creating all kinds of destructive beings that
devastated creation. Brahmá warned him of this and thus asked that he rétire and
perform penance, until the time for destruction arrived. (3.12.17-19) Thus Rúdra
circumambulated his father, Brahmá, addressing him with words of assent {bádham
iti) and entered the forest to perform austere penances. (3.12.20)
4 . Uddhava to Lord Krsna
While the rest of the Yádavas ended their earthly pastimes, Uddhava alone remained.
Lord Krsna considering Uddhava no way inferior than Himself, wanted Uddhava to
remain in this world after His disappearance and disseminate the knowiedge of the
Supreme by meeting with the sages at Badarikásrama (3.4.28-32). Although Uddhava
was anxious about the imminent separation form the Lord, to mitigate his separation,
he proceeded to Badarikásrama for association (3.4.21). Thus, Uddhava, as a pure
devotee of the Lord, carried out the order of Krsna more faithfuUy than going to
abode of the Lord. (3.4.28 P)
instruction
6.   Srila Visvanátha Cakravarti Tháküra has stated that the order of the spiritual
master is the life and soul of the disciples. As a man cannot separate his life from
his body, a disciple cannot separate the order of the spiritual master from his life.
(3.24.13 P)
7. The order of the father or spiritual master must be carried out without hesitation
or argument but with an immediate yes. That is real service to the father or
spiritual master. (3.24.13 P)
8.   This combination, the instruction of the spiritual master and the faithful
execution of the instruction by the disciple, makes the entire process perfect.
(3.22.7 P)
9. Devotional service entails being initiated by a hona fide spiritual master and
following his instruction in regard to hearing about the Lord. (3.5.42 P)
Execution
10. Execution of the Lord's service is the main occupation of the pure devotee (3.4.21
P)
11. As long as one is engaged in the execution of the order of the Lord, there is no
factual separation from H i m . (3.4.21 P)
12. One should be very careful to receive the message from the spiritual master
through the ears and execute it faithfully. That will make one's life successful.
(3.22.7 P)
Etiquette
13. One should he very careful about impertinently surpassing a superior, because by
so doing one loses his duration of life, his opulence, fame and piety and the
blessings of all the world. (3.4.26 P)
14. One should never pass over the honor due to an elderly spiritual master in the
interests of one's own personal gain and fame. Impertinence on the part of the
pseudo spiritual master is very risky to progressive spiritual realization (3.4.26 P)
Attitűdé
15. One should obey the command of his father or spiritual master with due
deference, saying, "Yes, sir (bádham i t i ) " (3.24.23)
16. There should be no instance in which the disciple or son says, "This is not
correct. I cannot carry it out." When he says that, he is fallen. (3.24.13 P).
17. Whether one is liberated or not liberated, one should execute the instruction of
the spiritual master with great faith. (3.24.5 P)
18. A person entrusted with responsibility should always be aware of his incapability
and must always look for the mercy of the Lord for the successful execution of
his duty. (3.9.29 P)
BMmm.fímmmmmmmmm%mi}
L     1 0 . W O N D E R F U L DARSANA
mm
Beauty of the Lord in H i s different forms is described throughout the third Canto.
Civen below are somé of those descriptions in brief. More details of the Lord's form
may be found in the originál text.
The ornament of all ornaments. [3.2.12]
Demigods exclaimed - Ultimate dexterous creation of Brahma. [3.2.13]
Copís would follow H i m with their eyes, and being stunned, they could not finish
their household duties. [3.2.14]
Warriors of Kuruksetra, while seeing the lotuslike face of Krsna, so pleasing to
the eyes, achieved the abode of the Lord. [3.2.20]
L O R D KRSISA'S D A R S A N A T O U D D H A V A '
Four hands with different symbols and yellow silk garments. [3.4.7]
Sitting, resting against a young banyán tree, with His right lotus foot on His left
thigh. [3.4.8]
DARSANA O F GARBHODAKASÁYÍ V I S N U T O L O R D BRAHMA
Lying alone on the gigantic white body of Sesa-nága. The jewels on the hoods of
Sesanága illuminated all the directions. [3.8.23]
Luster of His transcendental body mocked the beauty of coral mountain. [3.8.24]
Occupying the planetary systems His body was self-illuminated, well-ornamented
and unlimited in iength and breadth. [3.8.25]
The Lord (Krsna) showed His lotus feet by raising them. His splendorous
moonlike toenails appeared like the petals of a flower. [3.8.26]
His smile, nose, eyebrows, rays from lips and earrings are all beautiful. [3.8.27]
His form is paralleled with the beauty of a sandalwood tree and a great
mountain. [3.8.29-30]
Thematic Compilations       9\ ,"*.V^t|«Ne3'-*'*»V.
A i-íA          4A1
y**V
Waist covered by a yellow cloth (like saffron dust of kádamba) was encircled by a
well-decorated beit. Chest decorated with Srivatsa and unlimitedly valuahle
necklace. [3.8.28]
DARSANA O F LORD VARÁHA
Came as a small boar out of Brahmá's nostril, about thumb size and instantly
turnéd into a wonderful manifestation as gigantic as an elephant. [3.13.18-19]
Flying in the sky with tail slashing and hard hairs quivering with a luminous
glancé. He scattered the clouds with hooves and glittering white tusks. [3.13.27]
Killing the démon. He appeared just as an elephant becomes reddish from digging
in the purpie earth. [3.13.32]
Piaying Üke an elephant, suspended the earth on the edge of His curved white
tusks. He assumed a bluish complexion like that of a tamála tree. [3.13.33]
He is the form of the personified Vedas, and all H i s bodily limbs are compared
with different parts of a sacrifice. [3.13.34-38]
D A R S A N A O F L O R D V I S N U T O KUMÁRAS
Accompanied by associates bearing all paraphernalia. He personally spreads the
beauty and good fortune of the spiritual world. [3.15.38-41]
Resting one of His hands on the shoulder of Caruda, and twirled a lotus with
another hand. [3.15.40]
Lord's beauty, being many times magnified by the intelligence of His devotees,
defeated the pride of Laksmi. [3.15.42]
His face is like the inside of a blue lotus, His smile is like jasmine flower and His
lotus feet resemble rubies. [3.15.44]
DARSANA T O KARDAMA M U N I
Lffulgent like the sun, garlanded with white lotuses and water lilies, in yellow silk
garments and His lotus face fringed with slick dark locks of curly hair. [3.21.9]
Adorned with a crown and earrings, holding saiikha, cakra, gadá and a white lily,
His smiling glancé captivates devotees. [3.21.10]
Lndowed with Srivatsa and Kaustubha, He stood in the air with His lotus feet
placed on the shoulders of Caruda. [3.21.11]
Description of the overall beauty (3.28.13-20) as well as limb-by-limb (3.28.21-33)
description of the four handed form of Lord Visnu.
K   m   m   m   m    m     M     m      í    M      f    i    m      i   M      t    i    M       m   m   m
Appendix    ^gJ^^^^K^^^MMj^^^J^MM
1 . Character Portrayals
Vidura      263
Uddhava         264
Maitreya Rsi          264
Lord Kapila 265
Mother Devahüti              265
Kardama Muni            266
2 . Krsna's Names               268
3 . Saintly Q u a l i t i e s     274
4 . Analogies         277
Biography
1.    Born: of Vyásadeva (Vicitravirya's brother) and a maidservant. (3.5.19-20)
2.    Formerly: Yamarája, but was cursed by Mándavya Muni to be born as a südra. (3.5.20-
21)
3.    Name: Indicates an expert advisor, politically renowned and instructions exactly to the
point. (3.1.10)
4.    He is a pure devotee of the Lord. (3.1.4)
Activities
5.    Pilgrimage: After Duryodhana evicted him, Vidura went for a pilgrimage and completely
cleansed himself of all contaminations {virajds tirtha-sevayd). (3.1.17-24, 3.20.4)
6.    Learning: As suggested by Uddhava, he approached Maitreya for receiving
transcendental knowiedge. (3.4.26, 3.4.36)
Qualities
7.    Bold: Instructed Dhrtarástra to return the kingdom to the Pándavas. (3.1.11-13)
8.    Inquiries: are meaningful, purposeful and Krsna conscious. (3.1.4, 3.1.45, 3.14.5)
9.    Humble: Accepted spiritual knowiedge from a younger person, Uddhava (3.4.25)
10.   Optimist: He used the insult of Duryodhana for cultivating higher realization. (3.1.2 P,
3.1.16)
11.   Desire: Great appetite for hearing transcendental activities of Krsna. (3.14.1)
Interactions
12. Uddhava: Affectionately embraces and eagerly asks of the Yadu's welfare. (3.1.25)
13. Krsna: They were great friends. Krsna would sometimes place His feet on his lap.
(3.13.5)
mmmmmmmmm
UDDHAVA
Biography
1.   Nitya-siddha: At 5 years old, he would be so absorbed in his service to Krsna that when
called for breakfast by his mother, he would not come. (3.2.2-3)
2.   Vasú: He expanded as one of the eight Vasus (demigods) and desired to become one of
the Lord's associates. (3.4.11)
3.   Disciple: Great student of Brhaspati's (3.1.25)
Qualities
4.   Respectful: He bowed down to when he met Vidura (3.1.25).
5.   Mannered: Being much younger than Vidura, he sent him to Maitreya Rsi out of
etiquette. (3.4.26)
Activities
6.   Counsel: He would be called by Krsna for consultation on several topics (3.4.17)
7.   Companion: He was a constant companion of Lord Krsna (3.1.25)
Interactions with Lord Krsna
8. Lord Krsna's cousin (3.1.25 P)
9. Showed immense feelings of separation from Krsna. (3.2.1, 3.2.3-6)
10. Lord Krsna instructed him of His transcendental situation (paramdm sthitim) which is
considered deeper than the Catuh-sloki Bhdgavatam. (3.4.18-19 P)
11. Lord Krsna instructed Uddhava to go to Badarikásrama. He worshiped Nara and
Náráyana out of deep affiiction due to separation (3.4.21-22).
12. Sukadeva explained Lord Krsna's thoughts: "Uddhava is the foremost of My devotees,
beyond the influence of modes and not even inferior to Me. I will entrust Him as My
representative to disseminate knowiedge of Me on earth" (3.4.30-31)
MAITREYA RSI
Biography
1.   Fatber: Son of Kusáru, tbus also known as Kausárava. (3.5.15, 3.19.33)
2.   Guru: hecame the spiritual master of Vidura during his pilgrimage. (1.19.9-10 P)
3.   Mahá-bhágavata: disciple of Vyásadeva's father. Párására Muni. Thus Vyásadeva and
he were good childhood friends. (3.4.9, 3.25.4)
4.   Jnána-bhakta: Although great, he was considered a mixed devotee at the time when he
met Krsna and Uddhava. (3.4.10 P)
5.   Heard Bhágavatam: from Párására, on being advised by Pulastya. (3.8.9)
1. rli.iiMi liM rorlr.Ucils
yV
Activities
6.    Instructed: Vidura on transcendental knowiedge. (3.5.1)
7.    Ajnáta-sukrti: was able to spontaneously appear at the place of Lord Krsna and
Uddhava's final meeting. (3.4.9)
Qualities
8.    Enthusiastic: about describing the qualities of the Lord. (3.6.37, 3.7.42)
9.    Compassionate: for all living entities, thus spoke Bhágavatam to Vidura (3.8.2 P)
Interactions with Vidura
10. Vidura glorifies his qualification as a devotee and a spiritual master. (3.7.16-20)
11. Vidura had faith in him and thus requested him to erase all his doubts (3.10.2 P)
12. Maitreya was very pleased with Vidura's way of inquiry. (3.13.5)
L O R D KAPILADEVA
Biography
1.    Non-different: from the Supreme Lord, Madhusüdana (3.24.6)
2.    Appearance: through the body of his mother Devahüti. (3.24.6, 3.24.30)
3.    Prediction: Foretells own appearance to Kardama (3.21.32)
4.    Namesake: Often confused with an atheistic sage, also called Kapila. (3.24.10)
5.    Teachings: jnána-vijnána-yoga to uproot karma. (3.24.17)
Qualities
6.    Beautiful: golden hair, lotus eyes and lotus feet (3.24.17)
Activities
7.    Instructed: his father in the path of self-realization. (3.24.35-40)
8.    Imparted: knowiedge of highest yoga system to his mother. (3.25.13-14)
9.    Mother: Requested her permission upon leaving home. (3.33.33)
10.   All beings: In trance for the deliverance of the conditioned souls. (3.33.35)
I                                     MOTHER DEVAHÜTI
Biography
1.    Daughter of: Sváyambhuva Manu and Satarüpá. (3.12.56)
2.    Sisters: Áküti and Prasüti (3.12.56)
3.    Brothers: Priyavrata and Uttánapáda (3.22.9)
4.    Husband: Kardama Muni (3.12.57)
5.    Perfection: achieved perfection at Siddhapada (3.33.31)
WMmWMmWMmMímmMí£S&
Appen,                      m                                     .ÍfA«
6.    Yoga-laksana: advanced in yoga (3.21.4)
7.    Was deeply distressed upon Kardama wanting to leave home. (3.23.49-50)
8.    Wanted to enjoy matériái life with her husband, and a son. (3.23.10-11)
9.    Expressed her amazement at having the Lord as her son (3.33.2-4)
Qualities
10. Has all the qualities of a chaste and devoted wife (3.23.1-3)
11. Has all good qualities and character and was seeking a suitable husband. (3.22.9)
12. Beauty: that excelled the beauty of her ornaments. (3.22.16-18, 3.23.33)
13. Fixed: mind on Kardama when she heard about his character. (3.22.9-10)
14. Neglected body to care for her husband, and grew weak and emaciated. (3.23.4, 3.23.24-
25)
15. Looked at her husband as being greater than providence. (3.23.4-5)
16. Won the affection and blessings of her husband by her service. (3.23.5-8)
Activities
17. Realization: Not taken advantage of husband's spiritual advancement. (3.23.54)
18. Introspection: considered herself cheated by the Lord's máyá. (3.23.57)
19. Prudent: Did not stop Kardama, but begged for the ultimate gift of fearlessness.
(3.23.51, 54)
20. Glorifies Holy Name: even dog-eaters who chant are fortunate. (3.33.5-7)
21. Instructions: Adopted the practice of meditation taught by Kapila, hecame oblivious to
her own body, and achieved perfection. (3.33.24-30)
22. Destination: Achieved Lord Kapila's planet in the spiritual world and her body become
an auspicious river in this world. (3.33.30-32)
KARDAMA M U N I
Biography
1.       Manifested from the shadow of Brahmá, he executed austerities in honour of Brahmá's
instructions to populate the universe. (3.12.27)
2.       He had ten children through Devahuti. (3.24.12)
Qualities
3.       Dutiful: Honored his father by accepting and carrying out his instructions. (3.24.12)
Devoted: "Seeing Your form is the perfection of my sight" (3.21.13)
Honest: " I am foolish to have approached You with matériái desires but nevertheless
please fulfil my desire to marry." (3.21.15)
Far-sighted: "After giving my wife a son, I will accept the paramahamsa stage of life."
(3.22.19)
í   m   .        m      M    .   m     m     m    m     j   ^    m    M     '   ^   m     m    m     m     m
1. Character Portrayals
Activities
7.     Penance: on the bank of River Sarasvati for 10,000 years. (3.21.6)
8.     Worshiped the Lord through devotional service in trance. (3.21.7)
9.     Kardama wanted to marry because: (3.21.16 P)
• Not everyone is competent to be liberated.
• It is everyone's duty, therefore, to enjoy according to his present position, but
under the direction of the Lord or the Vedas.
• Thus conditioned souls can fulfill their desire to enjoy, but at the same time
gradually progress towards liberation.
• Renunciation (3.24.42-47)
interactions
10.    Requests Lord Kapila's permission for entering renounced order. (3.24.34)
11.    Completely satisfied Devahüti's desires for matériái enjoyment by
12.    Creating a celestial airplane (3.23.12-21).
13.    Restoring her body (3.23.22-35).
14.    Enjoying with her the best places of enjoyment in the universe (3.23.36-43).
15.    Enjoying household life with her, and giving her many children (3.23.44-48)
16.    All matériái facility to live comfortably (3.33.13-19).
17.    Reciprocated service by offering the results of his austerities to her. (3.23.7)
mmmmB¥m€fmm:0Mm€mmmii:M
\ppendix
TA
. KRSNA'S NAMES
The Srimad-Bhagavatam purifies its sincere readers by narrations of krsna-kathá and also
tbrougb the beautiful names of Krsna that are mentioned throughout its pages. These boly
names are intended to glorify the Lord, but they simultaneously purify tbe reader by
immersing him in the beauty of Krsna's qualities and activities. As this Third Canto promises,
simply by reciting tbe Lord's holy names, one is guaranteed to make spiritual advancement
(3.33.6), overcome innumerable sufferings (3.7.14) and purify himself, no matter in what
fallen condition he is. (3.16.6).
The following is a list of the Lord's names taken from the verses of the third canto
categorized into three sections.
1.   Names that highiight Lord's personal attributes.
1.   Names that relate the Lord with matériái nature
2. Qualifiers that bring out the character of the Lord.
It should be noted that somé names will fali into more than one of tbese three categories.
Although somé of tbese names appear repeatedly, we took only one instance of the name.
Names that highiight Lord's Personal Attributes
1    3.18.2    abhijitam             Victorious
2    3.5.1     acyuta                The infallible Lord
3    3.21.20   adhisa                Supreme controller
4 3.5.8        adhiloka-nátha        King of tbe kings
5    3.19.25   adhoksaja             Beyond the reach of all matériái calculations
6    3.5.49    aja                   Unborn
7    3.8.1     ajita                 Unconquerable
8    3.11.42   aksaram               Infallible
9    3.4.29    amogha                Unfailing
10    3.9.24    ananta                Unlimited
11    3.2.16    ananta-viryah         Unlimitedly powerful
12    3.26.28   aniruddha             Lord of tbe Mind
13    3.1.2     bhagaván              Supreme Personality of Godhead
2. Krsna's Names
14    3.9.22           bhagena             With six opulences
15    3.4.15           bhüman              Great one
16    3.7.28       srinivásasya            Personality of Godhead (Abode of Laksmi)
19    3.7.20       janardana               Controller of tbe living entities
21    3.24.18          kaitabha-ardanah    Killer of tbe démon Kaitabha
23    3.7.19           madhu-dvisah        Tbe Enemy of the Madbu démon
25    3.17.20          maha-atmanah        Supreme Lord
26    3.13.4           mukunda             One wbo awards liberation
27    3.7.14           muráreh             Lord Krsna, killer of the démon Mura
28    3.4.21           ndrdyanah           Lord wbo lies on tbe water
29    3.9.5            nátha               Master and Protector
30    3.14.9           purusam             Personality of Godhead
31    3.1.17           purusottama         Lord Jagannátba at Puri (Orissa)
32    3.26.21          sankársana          Worshipable deity of lord Siva
33    3.9.22           suhrt               Friend of all
34    3.13.25          sükara              Lord Boar
35    3.6.2            urukramah           Tbe Supreme powerful
36    3.26.21          vásudeva            All pervading Lord
37    3.26.4           vibhu               Greatest of tbe great
38    3.18.26          visva-jitá          Conqueror of the wbole universe
39    3.32.18          vikrama             Possessor of excellent prowess
40    3.15.34          vikuntha-bhartu     Lord of Vaikuntha
41    3.13.3           visvaksena          The avatára named Visvaksena
42    3.13.23          yajna               Lord Visnu, Lord Boar
44    3.3.23           yogesvaram          Tbe master of mystic power
II I      Names that relate the Lord with Matériái Nature
1    3.6.4      adhipürusam               The gigantic universal form
2    3.5.18     adhoksaja                 Transcendental Lord
3    3.15.48    anga                      Supreme Personality of Godhead
4    3.25.19    akhila-átmani             Tbe Supersoul
5    3.19.2     aksaja                    Tbe Lord, who was born from tbe nostril of Brahma
Appendix
6   3.7.4      asrdkslt            Caused to create
7   3.5.32     dtmanah             Supreme Soul
8   3.7.2      avikdrinah          Unchangeable
9   3.13.40    bhü-dhara           Lifter of the earth
10   3.9.4      bhuvana-mangala     All-auspicious for all tbe universes
11   3.32.10    brahma pradhdnam    Supreme Brahman
12   3.24.43    brahmani            Supreme
13   3.28.41    brahma-sarhjnitah   Brahman
14   3.4.32     sabda-yonind        Source of all Vedic knowiedge
15   3.25.2     sruta-devasya       Master of the Vedas
16   3.18.2     dhará-dhararh       Bearer of the eartb
17   3.16.22    dharma              Personification of all religion
18   3.7.35     dharma-yonih        Father of all religion
19   3.11.39    isvara              Controller
20   3.24.39    guhdsayam           Dweller in tbe hearts
21   3.13.48    hari medhasa        One who destroys tbe matériái existence of the devotee
22   3.8.29     indram              Garbhodakasáyí Visnu
23   3.11.38    jagat-dtmanah       The soul of the universe
24   3.1.9      jagat-guru          Teacber of tbe world
26   3.24.33    kdlam               Time
27   3.4.16     kdldtmanah          Controller of eternal time
28   3.13.9     ksiti-isvara        Lord of the world
29   3.7.19     küta-stha           Unchangeable
30   3.24.33    loka-pdlam          Maintainer of all the universes
31   3.24.33    mahdntam            Origin of the matériái world
32   3.25.29    nirvdna-dtman       Embodiment of nirvána
33   3.32.7     pardvaresam         Proprietor of tbe spiritual and matériái worlds
34   3.5.45     paresa              Supreme
35   3.25.41    pradhdna-purusa-    Lord of both prakrti and purusa
is varat
36   3.21.33    pratyag-aksaja      Directly perceived by senses
37   3.26.72    pratyag-dtmdnam     Supersoul
38       3.26.3      pratyag-dhama                            Perceivable everywhere
39       3.24.43     pratyak-dtmani                           Supersoul witbin everyone
3.13.5                                               Diverse enervies íinn aetivities ann n wnnnerfiil nrain
•L..! VV I - V l l V l - t S ^ V 3          dllVl         d V L l V l L l V S CtllSJ        41       3.19.3                                               1000 lewed Sunreme Beinv íthe universal forrni
J . V V-i vy        ^y^y^x.*     sy s-s » y v - x x x ^    x y v.. i x x ^ ^ i x . x x ^ I.X.XX x T x^L vicx • x vy x x x x /
42       3.7.28      1.3/   11*i-i/irrt                       One w h o creates
x^y x x ^      T T ííxy    X..Í. Xmf XX Xx. i_i
4T       3.7.6       ^Lti    1/L* / \ . 3 C - i - / C-i3»-*   u/U. L / J - C l l l C    x^ AJ 1 VJ O l L U d L V C J . 1 1 1 d l i L i l C          11 V l l l c ^   V.11LÍL1CO
avasthitah
44       3.6.6       sarva-sattva                             All living entities lying with Him
45       3.24.10     sattva                                   Uncontaminated existence
46       3.19.22     tri-pdt                                  Enjoyer of all sacrifices
47       3.16.22     tri-yuga                                 Manifests in all three millenniums
48       3.2.21      tryadhisah                               Lord of threes
49       3.16.24     visva-bhartuh                            tbe maintainer of the universe
50       3.15.26     visva-guru                               Teacher of the universe
51       3.3.19      visvatma                                 Supersoul of the universe
52       3.33.25     visvato-mukham                           Whose face is turnéd everywhere
W          Qualifiers That Bring Out The Character Of The Lord (Laksana)IBBBJH
1    3.25.9       ddyo bhagavdn puriisdm                                  Origin and Supreme Lord of all living                                                              entities
2    3.13.39      akhila mantra devatd                                   All-inclusive hymns of the Supreme Lord
3    3.1.2        akhilesvarah                                           Lord of everything
4    3.2.15       anukampita-dtmd                                        All-compassionate Lord
5    3.22.21      aravinda-ndbham                                        Lord Visnu, whose navel is adorned by a lotus
6    3.3.7        drta-bandhum                                           Friend of the distressed
7    3.4.4        drti-harena                                            Vanquisher of the distresses
8    3.24.23      saktim                                                 Powerful
9    3.25.11      saranam saranyam                                       Shelter of all shelters
10       3.1.29       sata-patra-netra                                       Lotus eyed Lord
11       3.4.6        sri-niketam                                            Shelter of the goddess of fortune
12       3.21.51       sukldya                                               Lord Visnu
13       3.4.7         sydma-avaddtam                                        Beautiful with black colour
14       3.15.39       sydme                                                 Lord with blackish colour
16       3.24.17       hiranya-kesah                                         Lord with golden hair
17   3.32.18   katnayam kathamya            whose pastimes are worth chanting or
18   3.24.33   kavtm                        Fully cognizant
19   3.15.48   kirtanya-ttrtha-yasasam      Whose pure glories are worth chanting of
20   3.8.27    loka-arti-hara               Vanquisher of the distress of the devotees
21   3.7.3     nivrttasya                   Detached
22   3.24.17   pada-ambuja                  Lord with lotus feet
23   3.24.17   padma-aksa                   Lord with lotus eyes
24   3.24.17   padma-mudrá                  Marked with the sign of the lotus
25   3.31.14   páram prakrti-               Lord who is transcendental to matériái nature and
pürusayoh pumariisam         living entities
26   3.4.14    paramasya puthsah            Supreme Personality of Godhead
27   3.24.34   patim prajánam               Lord of all created beings
28   3.15.40   pita-arhéuke                 Covered witb a yellow cloth;
29   3.32.7    prakrtim asyotpatty-         Cause of the manifestation and dissolution of
anta-bhávanam                matériái world
30   3.20.25   prapannartt-naram            T~\'        1   1   J   '   .   v   f     i    J   J
Dispels the distress or rhe surrendered
31   3.25.35   prasanna vaktra              Lord who has smiling face
32   3.28.18   punya-sloka-yasaskaram       Enhancer of rhe glories of devorees
33   3.21.8    puskara-aksah                Lorus-eyed
34   3.5.25    samdrastuh                   Perfect seer
35   3.25.11   samsára-taroh     kutháram   Axe that cuts the matériái tree of existence
36   3.25.8    sat-caksur                   Transcendental eye
37   3.25.11   sad-dha rma-vidám            Greatest of the knowers of eternal dharma
varistham
38   3.7.36    samprasidati                 Completely satisfied
39   3.18.34   srivatsa-ankasya             Bearer of the mark Srivatsa
40   3.2.34    strinárh mandala-            Central beauty among an assembly of women
mandanah
41   3.5.7     su-sloka mauleh              Auspicious Lord
42   0.15.9    surya caksuh                 T   „   1       L                       4.1.
Lord whose eyes are the sun
43   3.25.3    sva-chanda-átmá              Full of self-desire
44   3.7.      svatah-trptasya              Self-satisfied
45   3.4.16    svátman-rateh                One who enjoys in the self
46   3.1.45    tÍYthíi-hírti                                      VV l l V y i 3 \ ,   i i 1 G/1 J \-Cl d L G 3 L l . l J t i   Cl L   Jlvyiy
47   3.5.11    fírfn/i-ii/in/jh                                   ^JCnosp lotns fppt íirp all fnp n acps oi nupTimnp'p
48   3.4.32                                                       Snintiiai maqtpr of tnrpp worlns
50   3.25.2    iJziY^Yyiú.ftíih                                   Cifpatpst
ty í* l J ' r     mtli4-it'                        VJ i V.d L C 3 L
51   3.25.2    liíiY^YH/iH/ih                tiuYyi'sd.tyí        CrTPatPst amone^ mpn and mvstics
1/L* f JfrtLifl-Ltll          Ly Vt t ríOLd f rl
sarva-yoginám
52   3.13.26   veda - vitána- mürtir                              Whose form is the expansion of knowiedge
53   3.24.26   vibudha-rsabham                                    Chief of the demigods
54   3.5.26    viryavan                                           Greatest potent being
55   3.13.13   yajnadingah                                        Form of sacrifice
56   3.15.45   yutam asta-bhogaih                                 Who is endowed with eight kinds of achievement
Appendix
mmmm                                   -4      •immm
J^^SAINTLY QUALITIES^J
The Supreme Personality of Godhead has unlimited good and transcendental qualities and His
sincere devotees reflect these qualities in their behavior and personality. The study of Srimad-
Bhágavatam allows us to bask in the light of saintly qualities, reflecting upon them and
ultimately trying to apply them in our lives. Saintly persons bridge our relationship with the
Lord and thus by following their footsteps, we come closer to tbe Lord. The following is a lest
of saintly qualities we could learn from various devotees described in Canto 3.
IVIDURAI
1     amala-dtmana                     Saintly person (3.1.4)
2     agádha-bodham                   Unfathomed knowiedge (3.5.1)
3     sattama                          Purest (3.10.22)
4     ddrta                            One who so adores (to beat about Lord) (3.13.1)
5     sraddadhdndya                    Unto one eager to receive (3.13.3)
6     dsrutya bhagavat-kathdm          Achieved transcendental bliss by hearing the narration
ksattdnandarh páram lebhe        of the pastimes of Lord (3.19.33)
7     mahd-bhdgavata                   A great devotee of tbe Lord (3.20.2)
8     dvaipdyandd anavaro              Not inferior to Vyásadeva in any way (3.20.3)
10    Bhadra                           O sober one (3.2.33)
12    sausílya                         Gentle (3.5.1)
13    guna-abhitrpta                   Satisfied in transcendental qualities (3.5.1)
15    vidvan                           Learned one (3.7.16)
16    anagha                           Sinless one (3.7.33)
17    dvija-uttama                     Best amongst tbe bráhmanas (3.7.36)
18    ekdntikah                        Unalloyed devotee (3.20.2)
suhrt                            Intimate friend (3.20.2)
21    sarvdtmand sritah krsnarh        Accepted Krsna's lotus feet wboleheartedly (3.20.3)
22    tat-pardrhs anuvratah            Attacbed to Lord's devotees (3.20.3)
>yéé\                                          3. Saintly Qualities
KARDAMA                  MUNI
1    tapo-vidyá-yoga-yuktán              ruii or austerity, knowiedge and mystic power (3.22.2)
2    mano brahmani yuhjáno               Mind fixed on Lord (3.24.43)
3    nirahankrtih                        Without falsé ego (3.24.44)
4    labdhátmá                           Being situated in himself (3.24.45)
5    icchá-dvesa-vihinena                Freed from all hatred and desire (3.24.47)
6    atitarárh mayi                      Given up everything unto Lord (3.21.24)
sangrbhitdtmandm
8    dtmdnam sarva-bhütesu               Seeing the Lord seated in everyone's heart (3.24.46)
bhagavantam avasthitam
9    mahd-yogi                           Great mystic (3.21.4)
10   alampatdn                           Averse to sense gratification (3.22.2)
11   mukta-bandhanah                     Liberated from matériái bondage (3.24.45)
RsJllllll^lllllllllflIIIII^^
1     mahd-bhdgavatah                          A great devotee of the Lord (3.4.9)
2     budhah                                   Learned (3.7.1)
3     sraddhdlave anuvratdya                   Faithful follower (3.8.9)
4     bahu-vit-tama                            Greatly learned (3.10.2)
5     bhagavdn                                 O spiritually powerful one (3.11.17)
SVÁYAMBHUVA                        M A N U                    H I ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ H
1    praty-üsesv hrdd srnvan     Every morning, he would listen to the Lord's pastimes
hareh kathdh                with a loving heart. (3.22.33-36)
2    bhagavat-param              Great devotee of the Supreme Lord (3.22.34)
3    srnvato dhydyato visnoh     Engaged in hearing, contemplating, writing and chanting
kurvato bruvatah kathan     the pastimes ot the Lord (3.22.55)
4     -   J   a   .   •     -
Always engaged in matters regarding Vásudeva (3.22.36)
vasudeva-prasangena
5    nirmamah                    VIJ'.   aV.     . A AA.AAAy.A\    nCCcA.*-'.    r.A\   ÍJ.   JA   AA\
Witnout matériái attection (j.z4.44)
6    nirdvandvah                 Without duality (3.24.44)
7    sama-drk                    Seeing equally (3.24.44)
8   sva-drk                     Seeing himself (3.24.44)
9   pratyak                     Turnéd inward (3.24.44)
10   prasdnta- dhih              Perfectly composed mind (3.24.44)
11   dhirah                      Sober (3.24.44)
Appendix
PRAHLÁDA               MAHÁRÁJA
1      bhagavad-yasasa samam                                    Fame will )e broadcast equally with that of the Lord
(3.14.44)
2      alampatah                                               Virtuous (3.14.49)
3      sila-dharah                                             Qualitied (3.14.49)
4                 -J             1                             TV           •         í*       11           1         1".'           / "X A A   A r\\
guna-akarah                                             Reservoir or all good qualities (3.14.49)
5      satam matah
\               1 1                        í".l       T         1 / 1 - 1 . 1 , 1 ^ 1
Approved devotee or the Lord (3.14.45)
j   -     -        -                                 TTZT ' . 1                  1   1    '      11'               / yx A A     A r\ \
mana-atma                                               With expanded intelligence (3.14.48)
1 -               11-              1
7                                                              TTXr ' . 1                  1 1 * / * 1                    1 -X A A    A tx \
maha-anubhavan                                          With expanded influence (3.14.48)
8      maha-bnagavatah
nn                1                      / "x A A   A r\ \
Topmost devotee (3.14.48)
9         1       1 -   •            J   '   J.I   1
Greatest of the great souls (3.14.48)
mahatam mahisthah
10     pravrddha-bhaktya                                       Matured devotional service (3.14.48)
11     anubhávitdsaye                                          Situated in transcendental ecstasy (3.14.48)
12     nirvaira-ddibhih                                        Practice of freedom from animosity (3.14.46)
13     ananyayd drsd                                           Not wish for anything beyond the Lord (3.14.47)
14     visvarh prasidati                                       Everyone will be pleased with him (3.14.47)
15     hrstah pararddhyd                                       Happy in others' happiness (3.14.49)
16     vyathito duhkhitesu                                     Distressed in others' distress (3.14.49)
17     abhüta-satrur                                           No enemies (3.14.49)
OTHER             DEVOTEES                       QUALITY                         MEANING
1     Akrüra                                           anamivah                        Faultless (3.1.32)
2                                                      bhagavat-                       Surrendered unto the Lord (3.1.32)
prapannah
3     Descendants of Püru                              bhagavat-                       Chiefly devoted to the Personality of
pradhdnah                       Godhead (3.8.1)
4     Four Kumáras                                     munin                           Great sages (3.12.4)
5                                                      ürdhva-retasah                  whose semen flows upwards (3.12.4)
6                                                      niskriydn                       Free from all fruitive action (3.12.4)
7     Uddhava                                          prasdntam                       sober and gentle (3.1.25)
8                                                      bhdgavatah                      great devotee (3.2.1)
9     Sages headed by                                  visrambhdt                      Witb due respect (3.12.29)
Marici
ímMmMmm                                                      4. Analogies
Conveying a message becomes simple and easy witb tbe usage of analogies. We find
tbis very commonly in our scriptures and even day-to-day life. Several speakers in tbe
Bbágavatam like Sukadeva Gosvámi and Maitreya rsi used fitting analogies to present
deep pbilosopbical points and Srila Prabhupáda furtber elaborates tbe message of tbe
Bhágavatam witb contemporary analogies tbe modern man can relate to. Following is
a üst analogies from tbe verses and purports of Canto 3, duly categorized.
Note: Subjects/objects/things marked with same color are compared with each other
within a particular analogy. Example: Fire - Lord, friction - krpa-sakti
The Lord's appearance and disappearance:
1.   Just as fire is inberent in all elements, so tbe Lord is eternally present in tbe Holy
Dbáma. Just as fire is made visible by friction between jewels or stones, similarly
tbe Lord becomes visible by His krpa-sakti when His devotees are afflicted by tbe
demons. (3.2.15)
2.   Lord Krsna's appearance and disappearance are exactly like the rising and setting
of tbe sun. He appears and disappears in innumerable universes continuously. (3.2.7
V)
3.   At sunset tbe snakes become powerful, tbieves are encouraged, ghosts become
active, tbe lotus becomes disfigured and tbe cakraváki laments, so witb tbe
disappearance of Lord Krsna, tbe atheists feel enlivened, and the devotees become
sorry. (3.2.7 P)
Proper and mistaken knowiedge about the Lord's position:
4.   Just as one candle is used to light otber candles and altbougb all of them blaze witb
tbe same intensity, tbe initial one remains tbe originál. Similarly, altbougb there is no
difference between the various expansions of tbe Lord and Himself, tbe Lord
remains tbe Originál Personality of Godhead. (3.21.32 P)
5.  Just as fire is different from sparks, wood and smoke, Paramátmá is different from
the jiva, pradhána and body, senses and mind as He is the witness. Just as foolish
incorrectly consider sparks, wood and smoke to be tbe fire, less intelligent men
mistake tbe pradhána, the jiva, and bis body to be tbe svarüpa of tbe Lord.
(3.28.41 V)
6. What appears to be a cloud from a distance, and a big bili from closer proximity,
appears as a place of great variety when one is actually at tbe bili. One will similarly
be able to appreciate tbe Absolute Truth according to one's proximity to Him.
(3.32.33 P)
7. Tbe Supreme Lord, wbo is tbe originál fire, is never overpowered by máyá, but
jivas, wbo are sparks of the fire, are subjected to máyá's influence. (3.7.9 P)
8. Just as tbe stomach is tbe source of energy of all the limbs of the body, God is tbe
originál source of all energy manifested in the matériái and spiritual worlds (3.18.5
P)
9. Tbe sun is only one, yet tbe experience of every man at noon is that tbe sun is
directly on top of bis bead alone. Similarly, tbe one Supersoul oversees every
individual, but He appears to individually oversee each individual soul. (3.22.4 P)
10. Just as an authorized post-box of tbe postai system, performs tbe function of
carrying letters, tbe arcá-mürti of tbe Lord delivers the same unlimited potency
of Him wbicb can be experienced when He is personally present. (3.1.18 P)
11. Tbe members of tbe Yadu dynasty considered Krsna similar to themselves just as
tbe fisb, not understanding tbe moon's position, could mistakenly identify its
reflection in tbe ocean to be similar to itself. (3.2.8)
12. Just as a frog in a well cannot measure tbe lengtb and breadth of tbc Pacific Ocean,
a mundane Pb.D. person cannot perceive tbe transcendental nature of tbe Supreme
witb bis limited senses. (3.6.10 P)
Lord's ínteraction with matéria! nature:
13. Just as tbe painter's presence is required to produce a paiut of a specific color by
mixing different colours, tbe Lord's glauce is last finisbing touch at every stage in
the process of creation. (3.5.36 P)
14. A magician may appear as a cow by bis magicai talent, yet tbe cow does not
represent bis actual personality or nature. Similarly, tbc Lord appears as the
universal form by His máyá-sakti, altbougb tbe universal form is certainly not tbe
Supreme Lord. (3.7.2 P)
4. Analogies
15. Just as a King may visit the prison out of his own good will, but is never subject to
its restrictions, similarly, tbe Lord descends on tbe eartb by His own internál
potency, and is never subject to contamination by tbe modes of matériái nature.
(3.7.2 P)
16. Just as tbe clouds, darkness, and snow, altbougb created by sun, bave no power to
influence tbe sun, similarly, máyá, created by the Lord, has no power to cover Him.
(3.7.9 P)
17. Just as a spider creates, maintains, and unwinds its cobwebs by its own energy, the
Lord independently, by His own energy, creates, maintains, and destroys tbe
matériái world. (3.21.19)
18. As fire distributes its light and beat from one place, tbe Supreme Personality of
Godhead distributes His different energies all over His creation. (3.28.41 P, 3.7.3 P)
Lord's relationship w i t h the j i v a :
19. The living entity and tbe Lord as Supersoul are like two birds seated on a tree of
tbe body. Tbe individual soul is eating tbe fruit of tbe tree, but tbe Supersoul, is
witnessing tbe activities of tbe otber bird, just as a citizen of state is witnessed by
state autbority. (3.7.6 P)
20. Just as the Ganges nourisbes all the trees situated at its banks, the Lord nourisbes
every living entity. However, just as each tree produces different fruits due to its
own differing qualities, every living entity exbibits different traits according to bis
past karma. (3.5.38 P)
21. The Lord or tbe spiritual master is like an axe that cut tbe tree of matériái
existence for tbe disciple. (3.25.11)
22. Tbe Lord is like the sun. He illuminates tbe darkness of tbe conditional life of tbe
living entities. (3.29.5)
23. Just as an umbrella protects from beat of the sun, the Lord's lotus feet protects tbe
surrendered devotees from tbe sun of repeated birth and death. (3.21.17 P)
Lord's pastimes:
24. Just as tbe sun rises from the ocean and then enlivens tbe lotus flower in tbe
morning, tbe Lord first appeared from the womb of Devaki, and gradually
satisfied tbe inbabitants of tbe places surrounding Matburá. (3.2.15 P)
25. Tbe unborn Lord's birtb, fleeing to Vraja in fear of Kaihsa, and establisbing
Dváraká in fear of Jarásandba are enbancing His supreme glories. It is just like a
fatber's playful defeat by bis little son - tbe purpose is to give pleasure to tbe son,
and nothing more. (3.2.16, P)
26. Just as a cbild breaks so many dolls witbout any real endeavour, the Lord can
similarly kill millions of demons. (3.19.32 P)
**Vc5^i'      ^'^L3K^_^\Z33.ty*3J^_3^
Append:x|HBrrfaiF#r^^^
27. Just like an actor performs play on a stage, the Lord's incarnations imitate the
activities of the matériái world. (3.9.15)
28. Just as pure milk is poisoned by a serpent's touch, supremely pure pastimes of tbe
Lord bave no effect, when spoken by nondevotees and it also becomes poisonous.
(3.19.33 P)
29. Just as a king is always associated witb bis secretaries, commanders, servants, etc,
the Lord is always surrounded by bis associates. (3.25.38 P)
30. Tbe narrations of tbe spotless pastimes of the Lord are exactly like batbing in tbe
water of the Ganges. They can free one from all sinful reacrions. (3.20.5)
31. A cobra is very fierce before ordinary persons, but before an encbanter be is a
playtbing. Similarly, a démon may be very powerful in bis domain, but before tbc
Lord be is insignificant. (3.18.13 P)
A B O U T T H E PROCESS O F SPIRITUAL A D V A N C E M E N T
Qualities and Nature of Bhakti:
32. Just as tbe water of the Ganges flows naturally, uninterrupted, down towards the            i
ocean, similarly tbrougb unadulterated, uninterrupted devotional service one's
mind is at once attracted to bearing tbe transcendental name and qualities of the
Lord. (3.29.12)
33. Just as tbe eternal function of tbe fire is warmtb, tbe real dharma or constitutional
engagement of the soul, is engagement in tbe service of tbe Lord. (3.25.11 P)
34. J U S T as after awakening a person forgets things seen in a dream, similarly the jiva
who is Krsna Conscious forgers all bis cbanges of body. (3.33.26 P)
35. Just as the milk is perceived partially as white, palatable, cold, fragrant, and its
nomenclature as milk tbrougb eye, tongue, skin, nose and ears respectively, but
only the mind, tbe king of all senses, can perceive it witb all tbe qualities. Similarly,
tbe Lord is perceived partially as Brahman or Paramátmá tbrougb various
processes seeking Him, but only by bhakti alone He is seen face-to-face as tbe
Supreme Person. (3.32.33 V)
36. Brahraánanda is like a fig in comparison to devotional service wbicb awards an
ocean of bliss. (3.5.13, P)
37. Just as an ocean is unagitated by the constant flow of many rivers into it, similarly
a sober minded person full in Krsna consciousness is uninfluenced by multifarious
matériái desires. (3.24.44 P)
38. Just as in clear, unagitated water one can see everything clearly, similarly in pure
consciousness one can see tbe reflection of Lord and one's own existence. (3.26.22 P)
'^MMJ^MMJ^^&:                                                4. Analogies
39. Just as the sun reflected on water appears to be on tbe water but is many millions
of miles away from the water, similarly a person engaged in tbe bhakti-yoga
process is unaffected by matériái nature. (3.27.1 P)
Process of bhakti:
40. Tbe process of bhakti-yoga is tbe main river flowing down towards tbe sea of tbe
Absolute Truth, and all other processes like karma-yoga, jnána-yoga and astánga-
yoga are just like its tributaries. (3.32.37 P)
41. Just as tbe fire of digestion digests all that we eat, similarly the process of bhakti
dissolves tbe subtle body of tbe jiva witbout separate effort. (3.25.33 V)
42. Just as a man cannot separate bis life from bis body, a disciple cannot separate tbe
order of tbe spiritual master from bis life. (3.24.13 P)
43. Just as the sky can never be filled up, similarly tbe ears cannot become exbausted by
receiving more and more vibrations. (3.15.49 P)
44. Just as a student in a law class is considered to be already graduated from generál
education, similarly a person engaged in tbe chanting of tbe boly names of tbe Lord
has already passed all lower stages. (3.33.7 P)
45. Just as tbe chariot of air carries an aroma from its source and immediately catcbes
tbe sense of smell, similarly, the chariot of bhakti allows one to catcb tbe
transcendental existence of the Supreme Soul. (3.29.20)
46. Just as during yajha pouring oblations into asbes is a waste of time and resources,
similarly tbe Deity worship tainted witb disrespect of tbe Paramátmá by unkind
treatment to another jiva is of no use, as it's in ignorance. (3.29.22 P)
47. Just as a child stops all bis mischief upon receiving a better engagement, the senses
come under one's control upon giving them a bigber engagement. (3.7.13 P)
48. Just as bomeless souls following tbe path of birds making their way back to their
nest on a tree, find shelter under tbe base of tbe same tree, similarly sages
enlightened by tbe birds of Vedic knowiedge, emanating from tbe nest of tbe Lord's
lotus moutb, find shelter at tbe Lord's lotus feet. (3.5.41 V)
Results of bhakti:
49. Just as the miseries perceived in a dream are vanquisbed in deep sleep, similarly tbe
dream-like miseries of tbe matériái world are vanquisbed by complete absorption
in the Lord, Wbo attracts each of tbe senses of His devotees. (3.7.13 V)
50. Just as tbe biting of tbe snake witbout poisonous teeth is not fatál, similarly
accumulation of tbe wealtb for tbe Lord has no poisonous effect. (3.9.6)
Appendix
BMBmMMííMPimMPM
51. Just as the flame of a lamp, extinguished of oil, becomes conserved as an element
within tbe wick, similarly tbe mind of an accomplished yogi, upon extinguisbing
bis association witb tbe matériái world, becomes witbdrawn from external affairs
and becomes focused on the Lord within his heart. (3.28.35)
52. Just as a devotee of tbe sun-god can see tbe sun-god as be is even from tbis planet,
even though devoid of eyesight, similarly Lord's devotee can see tbe Lord witbin
himself due to bis premá, even tbougb be is not on the levél of a jnáni. (3.9.42 P)
53. Just as witbout the sun, one's eyes has no value, similarly witbout tbe ligbt of tbe
Supreme Lord, or witbout tbe divine grace of tbe spiritual master, one cannot see
things as they are. (3.25.9 P)
54. a) Just as tbe eyes are naturally connected to the sun, tbe jnáni by dint of bis jnána
is naturally associated witb Brahman. But just as tbe eyes may not appreciate tbe
potency of the sun, jnáni because of bis lack of affection for Brahman, cannot
utilize His mercy, and remain everlastingly in máyá.
55. b) However, just as the otber limbs of tbe body, witbout tbe same affinity as that of
tbe eyes for tbe sun can appreciate the warmtb of sun, devotees witb or witbout
jnána can appreciate the Lord's mercy and release themselves from matériái life.
(3.9.42 P)
Offences in bhakti:
56. Offences against devotees engaged in missionary activities causes one's devotion
become as barren as an alkaline field, wbere there is no strength to produce. (3.9.12
P)
57. Lord Caitanya said that an offense to a devotee is just like a mad elephant run loose;
when a mad elephant enters a garden, it tramples all tbe plants. Similarly, an
offense unto tbe feet of a pure devotee murders one's position in devotional service.
(3.15.39 P)
Instructions on process of bhakti:
58. Just as a liver patient may understand tbe existence of milk in a cow, altbougb be
takes only ber urine as treatment, a person may understand from scripture tbe
existence of an ocean of milk altbougb be may only experience tbe salt water
ocean. (3.2.8 P)
59. It is said that a noble man accepts tbe good qualities of a person of doubtful
character, just as a person accepts nectar from a stock of poison. (3.2.23 P)
60. Tbe path of spiritual life is stated in tbe Vedas to be like tbe edge of a sharpened
razor. A little inattentiveness may at once create bavoc and bloodsbed. (3.9.24 P)
61. Sense gratification is just like salt. One cannot take too much or too little, but one
must take somé salt in order to make one's foodstuff palatable. (3.15.8 P)
62. Just as a spot of white leprosy on any part of tbe body poUutes all of the skin,
similarly a wrong act committed by a servant leads people in generál to blame bis
master. (3.16.5)
Jnána - specific realizations:
63. Just as kindling sticks rubbed togetber produce tbe very fire that consumes them,
similarly the jnáni's sádbana applies tbe subtle body to awaken átma-jnána in bis
beart, wbicb destroys tbe very source of bis knowiedge - bis subtle body. (3.27.23
V)
64. Just as gold, when put into fire and fanned witb air, becomes free from all
impurities, similarly tbe minds of yogis wbo practice breathing exercises become
purified, being freed from all mentái disturbances. (3.28.10)
65. Just as there is no benefit in busking the skin of an empty paddy as tbe rice is
already gone, there is no meaning in simply speculating about tbe Lord as in tbis
way one cannot know tbe Lord and become freed from matériái bondage. (3.27.20
P)
A B O U T T H E JÍVA
Jiva as átmá:
66. Just as a person in a dream sees bis head cut off, altbougb bis bead is still intact,
the jiva's apparent loss of self-identity is illusory, for be can never lose bis
constitutional knowiedge and bliss. (3.7.10 P)
67. Just as tbe reflection of the moon on tbe water appears to quiver, but tbe moon in
tbe sky is fixed. Similarly tbe living entities appear to be tainted by matériái
qualities like illusion, lamentation and miseries, but in tbe pure soul such qualities
are completely absent. (3.7.11 P)
68. Just as fire is exhibited differently in different forms of wood, similarly tbe soul in
tbe universal body, altbougb of tbe same quality, is different from tbe soul in tbe
smaller body. (3.28.43)
69. Just as a person wbo has lost a great sum of money may tbink that be is lost, but
actually be is not lost-only bis money is lost, similarly when jiva falsely identify
with matter as bis field of activities, be tbinks that be is lost, altbougb actually be is
not. (3.27.15 P)
WMmMmmítiMmmmíiimimmm
I   Appendix      • " • : i l f i 2 * l Í € í l Í €
in relation to máyá:
70. Just as a school teacher threatens an errant pupil that the pupil would see his head
cut off and hanging on the wall, similarly máyá controls mischievous jiva going
against the will of the Lord, by piacing them in a dream-like state wbere they
perceive forgetfulness of their identity, and suffering (loss of bliss). (3.7.10 P)
71. Just as tbe seed of a cbild is put by tbe fatber in tbe womb of mother, similarly tbe
conditioned souls are put in tbe womb of mother eartb (prakrti) by tbe Supreme
Fatber. (3.13.42 P)
72. Just as a diseased or mad man's actions are completely out of bis control, yet be
tbinks himself to be in control, similarly tbe forgetful jiva's actions are controlled by
matériái nature, yet be tbinks himself to be tbe doer. (3.26.6 P)
73. Just as a mass of clouds does not know tbe powerful influence of tbc wind, a
person engaged in matériái consciousness does not know tbe powerful strength of
the time factor, by wbicb be is being carried. (3.30.1)
In relation to Krsna:
74. Just as a fisb cannot remain bappy out of tbe water, the spirit soul cannot be bappy
witbout Krsna. (3.2.11 P)
75. Just as a wealtby merchant wbo does not know that be possesses tbe wealtb and
acts like a poor man, similarly tbe jiva, because of lack of experience of Paramátmá,
does not bave affection for Paramátmá. (3.9.42 V )
76. Just as tbe propensity for enjoyment is present in both poor man and ricb man, but
the poor man cannot enjoy in tbe same quantity as tbe ricb man, similarly jiva
cannot experience tbe same quantity of enjoyment as tbe Lord. (3.29.35 P)
77. Just as tbe sun's rays are minute particles of tbe brilliant constitution of tbe sun,
similarly a living entity is a minute partiele of tbe Supreme Spirit. (3.25.17 P)
Without Krsna Consciousness:
78. Just as a bog lives in a filtby place ignorant of its own misery and engages in sex and
bard work, similarly the lowest of fools do not understand matériái miseries and
they pass their lives merrily, in sex and bard work. (3.7.17 P)
79. Just as tbe batbing of an elephant, that batbes nicely in tbe river but then later on
covers itself witb dust, is useless; similatly purification of a person batbing himself
in tbe Ganges and then committing sinful activities, is useless. (3.8.5 P)
80. Just as tbe white ducks take pleasure in a transparent laké filled witb lotus flowers
and crows in places of garbag , similarly tbe wise takes pleasure in transcendental
knowiedge and foolish in materialistic lifc. (3.9.1)
81. Just as a blind man leading otber blind men all goes into a ditcb, similarly one
suffering conditioned soul posing as leadet of otber suffering conditioned souls,
tbus all are put tbrougb furtber disadvantages. (3.9.8 P)
Family Life:
82. Just as a person can cross over tbe ocean witb seagoing vessels, similarly a man can
cross tbe dangerous situation of tbe matériái ocean by living witb a wife. (3.14.18)
83. Just as a fort commander very easily conquers invading plunderers, by taking
sbelter of a wife a man can conquer the senses, wbicb are unconquerable in tbe
otber spiritual orders. (3.14.20)
84. Family life witbin tbe kingdom of illusory energy, maya, is just like a prison for tbe
eternal living entity. (3.30.8 P)
85. Just as miserly farmers do not accord tbe same treatment to their old and worn-out
oxen, similarly tbe wife and others do not treat useless man witb tbe same respect
as before seeing bim unable to support them. (3.30.13)
86. Just as a dog eats whatever is negligently given to bim, similarly even if a man is
neglected by family members in bis old age, be cannot give up family affection.
(3.30.14, 15 P)
87. Just as smaller worms hite a big worms, similarly in bis belpless condition, gnats,
mosquitoes, bugs and otbet germs bite tbe baby, whose skin is tender. (3.31.27)
88. The woman, created by tbe Lord, is tbe representation of máyá, and one wbo
associates witb such máyá by accepting services must certainly know that tbis is tbe
way of deatb, just like a blind well covered with grass. (3.31.40)
89. A woman should consider ber husband, ber bouse and ber children to be tbe
arrangement of tbe external energy of tbe Lord for ber deatb, just as tbe sweet
singing of the hunter is deatb for tbe deer. (3.31.42)
90. As motbs at night surround a fire and are killed, so tbe demons become victims of
tbe movements of tbe ball-like breasts of a beautiful woman. (3.20.36 P)
91. Just as falling into a blind well in a deserted forest means certain deatb, those wbo
immerse themselves in family life, forgetting their eternal relationship witb tbe
Supreme Lord are in a very ominous position. (3.24.41 P)
Bound by Vedic ínjunctions:
92. Just as a buli is directed by the rope attacbed to its nose, similarly all tbe jiva witbin
tbe universe are conducted by tbe Vedic directions. (3.15.8)
93. Just as a citizen can violate tbe state laws, similarly the jiva cannot violate tbe
ínjunctions given in tbe Vedic literature. (3.15.8 P)
94. Tbe cbild in tbe womb remains just like a bird in a cage, witbout freedom of
movement. (3.31.9)
Appendix
95. Just as a woman undergoing labour pain promises never again to become pregnant,
similarly tbe jiva suffering in bis motber's womb, promises never again to commit
sinful activities by wbicb be will take birtb again. (3.31.11 P)
96. Just as a criminal is arrested for bis crimes by tbe constables of tbe state, similarly
the jiva is arrested for bis sense gratification by tbe Yamadütas. (3.30.20)
97. Just as a tbief is not spared, even if be agrees to return stolen property, a sinful
man is not spared in bell, even tbougb be does not carry the items of enjoyment to
bell witb bim. (3.30.32 P)
As a materialist:
98. Just as a stool-eating bogs prefer to eat rubbish, similarly persons interested in
materialistic activities prefer to engage in sense gratification. (3.32.19)
99. Just as there is no happiness in any of tbe activities of a madman, so in tbe activities
of materialistic man tbe mentái concoctions of happiness and distress are
false.(3.28.36 P)
100. Just as a miset fails to properly utilize an immense stock of wealtb; similarly tbe
materialistic person fails to properly utilize tbe buman intelligence to get out of tbe
cycle of birtb and deatb. (3.31.17 P)
A B O U T MATERIAL NATURE
In connection to the Lord:
101. Tbe unmanifested world is tbe self-same Personality of Godhead, but it appears to
be something else beyond or besides tbe Lord. It appears so because of its being
separated from tbe Lord by means of kdla. It is something like tbc tape-recorded
voice of a person wbo is now separated from tbe voice. (3.10.12 P)
102. Just as a woman is connected witb ber husband as a wife and witb ber children as a
mother, similarly tbe prakrti is connected witb both tbe Supreme Lord and tbe
living entities. (3.26.9 P)
103. Just as tbe combination of fatber and mother is tbe cause of cbildbirtb, so tbe
combination of tbe prakrti and the glancé of the Lord is tbe cause of tbe
manifestation of tbe matériái world. (3.32.7 P)
104. Altbougb tbe nipples on a goat's neck appear to be breast nipples, they do not give
milk. Similarly, prakrti appears to tbe matériái scientist to act and react in a
wonderful manner, but in reality it cannot act witbout tbe agitátor, time, wbo is tbe
representation of tbe Lord. (3.26.17 P)
immmmmmífimMmiiiWimmMti
Creation:
105. Just as a person at night remains inactive, covered by tbe darkness of night, but
when be is awakened in tbe morning tbe forgetfulness of tbe sleeping state
disappears, similarly when tbe mahat-tattva appears after tbe night of dissolution,
tbe effulgence is manifested to exbibit tbe variegatedness of tbis material world.
(3.26.20 P)
Systems:
106. Just as tbe sun will continue to exist eitber covered by clouds or in a clear sky,
similarly tbe varnasrama system will continue to exist even if it appears as a
bereditary caste system and tbus degraded, but in every society there is an intelligent
class of men, a martial class, a mercantile class and a labourer class. (3.21.52-54 P)
Managers:
107. As somé of tbe old prisoners in government jails are entrusted witb somé
responsible work of prison management, so tbe demigods are improved conditioned
souls acting as representatives of the Lord in tbe material creation. (3.5.51 P)
108. Just as tbe qualities of a gentleman are more bigbly appreciated than tbe qualities of
a man in ignorance, similarly in tbe material world tbe qualities of tbe demigods are
bigbly appreciated. (3.15.25 P)
109. Just as a bigbly posted manager is almost as independent as tbe owner of a firm,
Brahma is almost as independent as tbe powerful and independent Lord. (3.20.17 P)
110. Just as the sun evaporates water from filtby places and yet is not infected witb tbe
quality of tbe filtb, similarly a great soul like Brahma remains unimpeacbable
despite apparent discrepancies. (3.12.31 P)
111. Just as a fire can consume anything and everything witbout being contaminated,
similarly tbe fire of Brahmá's greatness consumed bis desire for tbe sinful act of sex
witb bis daughter. (3.12.34 P)
A B O U T T H E SPIRITUAL W O R L D A N D LIBERATED S O U L S
The spiritual world
112. Just as witbin tbe material universe tbe cbief planet is the sun, in tbe spiritual
world tbe cbief planet is Krsnaloka. (3.29.13 P)
113. Just as one mistakenly perceives an oyster shell to be golden does not show that tbe
shell itself is unreal. Similarly, that tbe material world is not tbe spiritual world
does not mean that tbe material world does not exist. (3.32.28 P)
Appendix
114. Just as a locket outshines in a necklace of jewels, similarly the Vaikuntha planet
outshines over all other celestial planets. (3.15.39 P)
Liberated souls:
115. As the contamination of the germs of a particular disease can influence a weaker
person and not the strong one, similarly the influence of material nature can act on
the weaker conditioned soul and not on the liberated soul. (3.25.18 P)
116. Just as a kitten being beid in tbe moutb of its mother is fearless, but tbe rat is
fearful, similarly devotees being under tbe sbelter of tbe Lord are fearless, but tbe
non-devotees feels tbe blows of deatb. (3.25.24 P)
117. Just as the person can perceive tbe sun by its reflection, similarly a pure devotee
can. perceive tbe Lord in everything, by observing tbe reflection of His energy in the
máteriabworld. (3.27.12 P)
118. Just áka green bird appears to mérge in a green tree, but in actuality, does not lose
its indfViduality. Similarly, a living entity mérged eitber in tbe material nature or in
the spiritual nature does not give up bis individuality. (3.27.14 P)
119. As long as a person does not commit criminal acts, even tbougb be is associated witb
tbe police office, be is not punisbed. Similarly, tbe liberated soul is not affected by
material miseries, even tbougb situated in material nature. (3.27.21 P)
120. Just as an intoxicated person cannot understand whether or not be has clothing on
bis body, tbe perfectly realized soul has no conception of bow tbe material body is
moving or acting. (3.28.37)
121. Just as an electric fan continues to rotate even after switching off as long as residual
inertia exists, similarly tbe liberated yogi's material body continues only as long as
tbe last traces of bis past karma remains. (3.28.38 P)
122. As a person can understand that bis family and wealtb are different from bim,
similarly tbe liberated soul can understand that be and his body are not tbe same.
(3.28.39)
123. Just as there are many pbysiological constructions witbin tbe body yet they work in
one order for tbe satisfaction of tbe stomach, and just as in a macbine there are
bundreds and tbousands of parts yet they run in barmony to fulfil tbe function of
tbe macbine, similarly tbe inbabitants of Vaikuntha also perfectly engage in tbe
service of tbe Lord for His pleasure. (3.15.33 P)
This publication is a precious jewel, both adding to tbe unlimited radiance of
Krisbna's presence as Srimad-Bbagavatam and reflecting tbat splendour.
- HH DEVAMRITASWAMI
I pray tbat eacb reader may enter deeper and deeper into tbe knowledge and
devotional love (Bbakti ras) of tbe essence of all Vedas - Srimad Bbagavatam.
Bbagavata Subodbini is a praisewortby project for deepening our appreciation
of the Bbagavatam, particularly from tbe insigbt of Srila Visvanatba
Cakravarti.                                                     .J)
- I^H BHANU SWAMI
Bbagavata Subodbini is a great tool for an in-deptb, systematic and          JJ
scrutinizing study of Srimad Bbagavatam. I strongly recommend this           ^
masterpiece for one and all, young and old, alike.          4/1 H            ))
- H HLOKANAÍHASWAMI
In one book I bave access to commentaries of different acaryas, tbat too
presented in an interesting tabular formát wbicb made it easy and clear to
read. This book is like a Bbagavatam dUgest.
Ihanks to Bhaktivedanta Vidyapitha for tbeir dedicated eflForts in making Srüa
Prabhupada's master piece work more easy and accessible for all.
- HG RADHESHYAM DAS
I S B N : 978-93-81283-30-i
WWW. tuhibooks.com             www. vidyapitha.in
