--- SOURCE: Uddhava-Gita/index.html ---
Uddhava-Gita
ÇRÉ ÇRÉ GURU-GAURÄÌGAU JAYATÄÙ
THE
UDDHAVA-GÉTÄ
of
Kåñëa-Dvaipäyana Vyäsa
etäà sa ästhäya parätma-niñöhäm adhyäsitäà pürvatamair maharñibhiù
ahaà tariñyämi duranta-päraà tamo mukundäìghri-niñevayaiva
I shall cross over the insurmountable ocean of nescience by being firmly fixed in the
service of the lotus feet of Kåñëa. This was approved by the previous äcäryas, who were
fixed in firm devotion to the Lord, Paramätmä, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Publications by Touchstone Media:
Gétä Mahätmya and Çrémad Bhägavatam Mahätmya
Prärthanä
Çré Bhaktivinoda Väëé Vaibhava Volume 1, Sambandha
Çré Bhaktivinoda Väëé Vaibhava Volume 1, Abhideya and Prayojana
Çré Prema Bhakti-candrika
Särvabhauma Çataka
Hari Bhakti Kalpa Latika
Çré Nityänanda-caritämåta
Pada Sevana
Sweet Pastimes of Damodara
Epic Characters of Mahabharat Series
Krishna Pocket Guide
Prema Vilasa
If you are interested in the purchasing or the distributing of this book or any of the
above publications, you may contact the publisher at:
Touchstone Media
Block FE 2/3, Sector 3
Salt Lake, Kolkata 700106
India
E-mail : isvara.ggs@pamho.net or isvara99@gmail.com
Website: www.touchstonemedia.com
THE
UDDHAVA-GÉTÄ
Original Sanskrit Text, Roman Transliterations, and Translations
Featuring
Särärtha DarçinéCommentary by
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura
Chapter Summaries and Gauòéya Bhäñya Purport by
Çréla Bhakti Siddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura
Produced and Published by Éçvara däsa
Translated by Bhümipati däsa
Edited by Pürëaprajïa däsa
The Uddhava Gétä
Särärtha Darçiné Commentary by Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura
Chapter Summaries and Gauòéya Bhäñya Purport by
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura
Produced and Published by Éçvara däsa
Translated by Bhümipati däsa
Edited by Pürëaprajïa däsa
Typeset by Caitanya devé däsé
Editorial Input by Sämba däsa
Proofread by Kåñëa-kåpa däsa
Index by Grahila däsa
Cover Painting by Aïjana däsa
Layout and Design by Éçvara däsa
First Printing 2007, 2000 copies
ISBN 81-87897-13-3
We are greatly thankful to the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust for their English edition of
the Eleventh canto of the Çrémad Bhagavatam, which served as a guide for this book.
Printed in India.
DeDication
This Book is DeDicaTeD To
his Divine Grace
a. c. BhakTiveDanTa swami PraBhuPäDa
FounDer äcärya inTernaTional socieTy For krishna consciousness
who revealeD To The worlD BhaGavaD-GéTä as iT is
Contents
Introduction    1
Chapter 1: Lord Kåñëna Instructs Uddhava    9
Chapter 2: The Story of Piëgalá    61
Chapter 3: Detachment from All that is Material    93
Chapter 4: The Nature of Fruitive Activity    119
Chapter 5: The Symptoms of Conditioned and Liberated Living Entities    147
Chapter 6: Beyond Renunciation and Knowledge    191
Chapter 7: The Haàsa-avatära Answers the Questions of the Sons of Brahmä   213
Chapter 8: Lord Kåñëa Explains the Yoga System to Çré Uddhava    245
Chapter 9: Lord Kåñëa’s Description of Mystic Yoga Perfections    277
Chapter 10: The Lord’s Opulence    301
Chapter 11: Lord Kåñëa’s Description of the Varëäçrama System    323
Chapter 12: Description of Varëäçrama-dharma    361
Chapter 13: The Perfection of Spiritual Knowledge    399
Chapter 14: Pure Devotional Service Surpasses Knowledge and Detachment    431
Chapter 15: Explanation of the Vedic Path    465
Chapter 16: Enumeration of the Elements of Material Creation    499
Chapter 17: The Song of the Avanté Brähmaëa    541
Chapter 18: The Philosophy of Säìkhya    585
Chapter 19: The Three Modes of Nature and Beyond    605
Chapter 20: The Aila-gétä    631
Chapter 21: Lord Kåñëa’s Instructions on the Process of Deity Worship    657
Chapter 22: Jïäna-yoga    691
Chapter 23: Bhakti-yoga    729
Glossary    763
General index    771
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
IntroduCtIon
oà ajïäna-timirändhasya jïänäïjana-çaläkayä
cakñur unmélitaà yena tasmai çré-gurave namaù
çré-caitanya-mano-’bhéñöaà sthäpitaà yena bhü-tale
svayaà rüpaù kadä mahyaà dadäti sva-padäntikam
I was born in the darkest ignorance, and my spiritual master opened my eyes with
the torch of knowledge. I offer my respectful obeisances unto him. When will Çréla Rüpa
Gosvämé Prabhupäda, who has established within this material world the mission to fulfill
the desire of Lord Caitanya, give me shelter under his lotus feet?
vande ‘haà çré-guroù çré-yuta-pada-kamalaà çré-gurün vaiñëaväàç ca
çré-rüpaà sägrajätaà saha-gaëa-raghunäthänvitaà taà sa-jévam
sädvaitaà sävadhütaà parijana-sahitaà kåñëa-caitanya-devaà
çré-rädhä-kåñëa-pädän saha-gaëa-lalitä-çré-viçäkhänvitäàç ca
I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of my spiritual master and unto
the feet of all Vaiñëavas. I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of Çréla Rüpa
Gosvämé  along  with  his  elder  brother  Sanätana  Gosvämé,  as  well  as  Raghunätha  Däsa
and  Raghunätha  Bhaööa,  Gopäla  Bhaööa,  and  Çréla  Jéva  Gosvämé.  I  offer  my  respectful
obeisances  to  Lord  Kåñëa  Caitanya  and  Lord  Nityänanda  along  with  Advaita  Äcärya,
Gadädhara,  Çréväsa,  and  other  associates.  I  offer  my  respectful  obeisances  to  Çrématé
Rädhäräëé and Çré Kåñëa along with Their associates Çré Lalitä and Viçäkhä.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
he kåñëa karuëä-sindho déna-bandho jagat-pate
gopeça gopikä-känta rädhä-känta namo ‘stu te
O my dear Kåñëa, You are the friend of the distressed and the source of creation. You
are the master of the gopés and the lover of Rädhäräëé. I offer my respectful obeisances
unto You.
tapta-käïcana-gauräìgi rädhe våndävaneçvari
våñabhänu-sute devi praëamämi hari-priye
I offer my respects to Rädhäräëé, whose bodily complexion is like molten gold and
who is the Queen of Våndävana. You are the daughter of King Våñabhänu, and You are
very dear to Lord Kåñëa.
väïchä-kalpatarubhyaç ca kåpä-sindhubhya eva ca
patitänäà pävanebhyo vaiñëavebhyo namo namaù
I offer my respectful obeisances unto all the Vaiñëava devotees of the Lord. They can
fulfill the desires of everyone, just like desire trees, and they are full of compassion for
the fallen souls.
çré-kåñëa-caitanya prabhu-nityänanda
çré-advaita gadädhara çréväsädi-gaura-bhakta-vånda
I  offer  my  obeisances  to  Çré  Kåñëa  Caitanya,  Prabhu  Nityänanda,  Çré  Advaita,
Gadädhara, Çréväsa and all others in the line of devotion.
hare kåñëa hare kåñëa kåñëa kåñëa hare hare
hare räma hare räma räma räma hare hare
Uddhava-gétä is a hidden treasure practically unknown to the people of the world,
and the reason for this is certainly a great mystery. Uddhava-gétä was personally spoken
by Lord Sri Krishna just prior to His disappearance from this material world, more than
five thousand years ago. It is the Lord’s final instructions, imparted to His dear devotee,
Çré  Uddhava.  His  Divine  Grace  A.C.  Bhaktivedanta  Swami  Prabhupäda  wrote  about
the Uddhava-gétä:
“Lord Çré Kåñëa is factually the spiritual master of the three worlds, and He is the
original source of all Vedic knowledge. It is very difficult, however, to understand the
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Introduction
personal feature of the Absolute Truth, even from the Vedas. His personal instructions
are needed in order to understand the Personality of Godhead as the Supreme Absolute
Truth.  Bhagavad-gétä  is  the  evidence  of  such  transcendental  knowledge  in  gist.  One
cannot know the Supreme Lord unless one is graced by the Lord Himself. Lord Kåñëa
exhibited  this  specific  mercy  towards  Arjuna  and  Uddhava  while  He  was  in  the
material world. Undoubtedly Bhagavad-gétä was spoken by the Lord on the Battlefield
of Kurukñetra just to encourage Arjuna to fight, and yet to complete the transcendental
knowledge of Bhagavad-gétä, the Lord instructed Uddhava. The Lord wanted Uddhava
to  fulfill  His  mission  and  disseminate  knowledge  which  He  had  not  spoken  even  in
Bhagavad-gétä.”
From  this  we  can  understand  that  although  Uddhava-gétä  contains  instructions
similar  to  those  imparted  to  Arjuna  on  the  battlefield  of  Kurukñetra,  it  also  contains
very  confidential  teachings  that  are  not  available  even  in  Bhagavad-gétä.  The  five
truths  that  embody  the  teachings  of  Bhagavad-gétä—éçvara  (the  Supreme  Lord),  jéva
(the living entities), prakåti (material nature), käla (time), and karma (activities)—are
fully elaborated upon in the Uddhava-gétä.
The  Vedic  literature  offers  us  many  gétäs,  or  songs.  There  are  the  Gétä  Govinda,
Venu-gétä,  Bhramara-gétä,  Gopi-gétä,  Avanti-gétä,  Bhagavad-gétä,  Uddhava-gétä  and
many more. All of these gétäs have one thing in common: they are either songs of the
Lord Himself, or of His devotees. In either case, the purpose of these songs is to invoke
our forgotten eternal loving relationship with the Supreme Lord. Thus, the songs found
in the Vedic literature are not like the ordinary songs of this material world, which are
compared to the croaking of frogs, simply inviting the snake of death.
Near  the  end  of  Lord  Kåñëa’s  manifested  pastimes  in  this  material  world  five
thousand  years  ago,  the  demigods,  headed  by  Brahmä  and  Çiva,  went  to  see  Him  at
Dvaraka. At that time, they submitted this appeal:
“My dear Lord, previously we had requested You to remove the burden of the earth.
O  unlimited  Personality  of  Godhead,  that  request  has  now  been  fulfilled.  You  killed
innumerable  demons  in  order  to  protect  Your  devotees,  and  You  re-established  the
religious  principles  that  had  been  forgotten  in  the  course  of  time.  You  have  certainly
broadcast  Your  glories  throughout  the  world,  so  that  everyone  can  easily  become
purified simply by hearing about You. Descending into the dynasty of King Yadu, You
have  manifested  Your  unique  transcendental  form,  and  for  the  benefit  of  the  entire
universe,  You  have  executed  magnanimous  transcendental  pastimes.  My  dear  Lord,
pious and saintly persons, who, in the age of Kali, hear and chant narrations of Your
transcendental pastimes, will easily cross over the dense darkness of that terrible age.
O  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  O  my  Lord,  You  have  descended  into  the  Yadu
dynasty,  and  thus  You  have  spent  one  hundred  and  twenty-five  autumns  with  Your
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
devotees. My dear Lord, there is nothing remaining for Your Lordship to do on behalf of
the demigods. O Lord, You are the basis of everything and if You so desire, then kindly
return to Your own abode in the spiritual world.”
Lord Çré Kåñëa replied, “I have very well understood your prayers. I have certainly
executed My duty of removing the burden of the earth, but if I depart for My own abode
at  this  time,  the  members  of  the  Yadu  dynasty  will  constitute  another  great  burden.
Therefore, before I depart from this world, I shall arrange for the withdrawal of the Yadu
dynasty.”
Thereafter,  Lord  Kåñëa  inspired  Durvasa  Muëi  and  other  sages  to  curse  the
members of the Yadu dynasty, so that while quarrelling with each other, they would be
annihilated. Lord Kåñëa then met the elder members of the Yadu dynasty and informed
them, “Because of the curse of the brahmaëas, I see many inauspicious omens foreboding
great disturbances and destruction. We should therefore go to Prabhasa-téröha, which is
a very sacred place. There, we will be able to counteract the ill effects of all our sinful
activities by satisfying the brahmaëas with gifts of charity.”
Then, in obedience to the Lord’s desire, the members of the Yadu dynasty went to
Prabasha-téröha, and a fire sacrifice was performed. At that time the men of the Yadu
dynasty  drank  an  intoxicating  beverage  that  made  them  forget  everything,  even  the
identities of their mothers, brothers, fathers, children, and friends. Being intoxicated, by
the will of the Lord, they fought with each other, and the result was the annihilation of
the Yadu dynasty. Actually, the annihilation of the Yadu dynasty was a display of the
Lord’s  illusory  energy,  Maya.  The  Yadavas  are  eternal  associates  of  the  Lord,  and  are
therefore eternally liberated souls. When He had contemplated winding up His pastimes
within the material world, the Lord considered how, in His absence, the members of the
Yadu dynasty would suffer greatly in separation from Him. It is for this reason that the
Lord arranged for their return to His supreme abode before His own departure from the
material world.
Thereafter  Lord  Balaräma  appeared  in  His  form  as  Seña-naga  and  departed  from
this world. Lord Çré Kåñëa then sat underneath a banyan tree, meditating upon Himself.
At that time, Uddhava came before Him and prayed, “My dear Lord, I know that You
want to return to Your eternal abode in the spiritual sky. I cannot bear to live without
You, and so please take me with You.”
Lord Çré Kåñëa replied, “There is something remaining for you to do on My behalf
in  this  world,  and  so  you  must  stay  here  for  some  time.  I  will  now  disclose  to  you  the
most confidential understanding of religious principles, whereby even a blind man can
easily follow the path and ultimately attain pure love for Me. After understanding this
most confidential subject matter, it will be your duty to impart it to the sages residing at
Badarikäçrama, headed by Nara-Närayäëa Åñi.”
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Introduction
The reason for the Lord’s descent into the material world was revealed by the Lord
Himself in the Bhagavad-géta:
yadä yadä hi dharmasya glänir bhavati bhärata
abhyutthänam adharmasya tadätmänaà såjämy aham
Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant
of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time I descend Myself.
The  Lord  executed  His  will  Himself,  as  well  as  through  the  agency  of  His  dear
devotees. It is explained by the Lord in the Bhagavad-gétä that only His pure devotees
are fit to receive His revelation and pass it on to others:
sa eväyaà mayä te ‘dya yogaù proktaù purätanaù
bhakto ‘si me sakhä ceti rahasyaà hy etad uttamam
That very ancient science of the relationship with the Supreme is today told
by Me to you because you are My devotee as well as My friend and can therefore
understand the transcendental mystery of this science.
The Lord had already delivered the science of the Supreme to His dear friend and
devotee, Arjuna. Now, before enacting His pastime of disappearance from the material
world, He desired to deliver more confidential understandings, and He considered Çré
Uddhava to be the fit candidate for receiving these instructions. The unique qualification
of Çré Uddhava was revealed by the Lord Himself in a verse of the Uddhava-gétä:
na tathä me priyatama ätma-yonir na çaìkaraù
na ca saìkarñaëo na çrér naivätmä ca yathä bhavän
No one is as dear to Me as you, O Uddhava, not My son Brahmä, not Çiva
who was born out of My very body, not My brother Saìkarñaëa, not Lakñmé, My
consort, who dwells eternally on My chest. Even My own body is not as dear to
Me as you are.
asmäl lokäd uparate mayi jïänaà mad-äçrayam
arhaty uddhava eväddhä sampraty ätmavatäà varaù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
Now I shall leave the vision of this mundane world, and I see that Uddhava,
the foremost of My devotees, is the only one who can be directly entrusted with
knowledge about Me.
His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada commented on this verse
as follow:  “Jïänaà mad-äçrayam is significant in this verse. Transcendental knowledge
has three departmental divisions, namely knowledge of impersonal Brahman, knowledge
of the all-pervading Supersoul and knowledge of the Personality of Godhead. Out of the
three, transcendental knowledge of the Personality of Godhead has special significance
and  is  known  as  bhagavat-tattva-vijïäna,  specific  knowledge  of  the  Personality  of
Godhead.  This  specific  knowledge  is  realized  by  pure  devotional  service  and  no
other  means.  Bhagavad-gétä  (18.55)  confirms  this:  bhaktyä  mäm  abhijänäti  yävän  yaç
cäsmi  tattvataù.  ‘Only  persons  engaged  in  devotional  service  can  factually  know  the
transcendental position of the Lord.’ Uddhava was considered to be the best amongst
all devotees of that time, and therefore he was directly instructed by the Lord’s grace,
so that people might take advantage of Uddhava’s knowledge after the disappearance
of the Lord from the vision of the world. This is one of the reasons why Uddhava was
advised to go to Badarikäçrama, where the Lord is personally represented by the Nara-
Näräyaëa Deity.”
As Uddhava was being instructed by the Lord in this most confidential understanding
of the science of the Supreme, he posed the following question:
“The entire world is entangled in household-life. How can the worlds’ population be
liberated and develop attachment for You.”
The  Lord  knew  that  soon  after  His  departure  the  earth  would  be  consumed  by
the  powerful  effects  of  Kali-yuga,  and  so  He  advised  His  dear  devotee  not  to  remain
in  household  life,  but  instead  take  to  a  life  of  renunciation  and  go  to  a  place  in  the
Himalayas where great sages reside.
One might ask, “Why was Uddhava instructed to renounce the material world and
go to the forest? After all, he was already a liberated devotee and a dear associate of the
Lord.”
The answer is that just as Arjuna was put into illusion on the battlefield of Kuruksetra
so  that  the  Lord  could  speak  the  Bhagavad-gétä  to  him,  and  thus  to  the  entire  world,
similarly,  Uddhava  was  advised  to  stay  in  this  world  after  the  Lord’s  departure,  just
so  that  he  could  deliver  these  final  and  most  confidential  instructions  to  the  sages  at
Badarikasrama, and thus to the entire world.
This conversation between the Lord and His dear devotee has been appropriately
named Uddhava-gétä, although Lord Krsna is the speaker and Uddhava is the listener of
the divine song. Uddhava-gétä begins by citing an ancient conversation that took place
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Introduction
between  Mäharäja  Yadu  and  a  wandering  mendicant,  who,  although  naked,  appeared
quite healthy and self-satisfied.
The Srimad Bhagavatam (1.2.6) reveals how one can be happy in this world:
sa vai pumsam paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhoksaje
ahaituky apratihata yayatma suprasidati
The  supreme  occupation  for  all  humanity  is  that  by  which  men  can  attain
to loving devotional service unto the transcendent Lord. Such devotional service
must be unmotivated and uninterrupted to completely satisfy the self.”
Such  a  self-satisfied  person  always  engages  in  remembering  Lord  Çré  Kåñëa’s
transcendental  pastimes.  Yadu  Mäharäja  offered  his  respects  to  the  contented  and
naked wandering mendicant and said, “I would like to know something. You are naked
and you have no possessions. You do not beg for your subsistence, and you roam freely
throughout  the  world.  How  is  it  that  you  look  so  happy  and  healthy?  I  want  to  know
about this.”
In response, the naked sage explained how he had attained the state of self-realization
by accepting twenty-four teachers. By observing their characteristics, he had attained
his exalted spiritual status as an unattached and self-satisfied person.
Uddhava-gita  contains  unparalleled  instructions  of  the  Lord  that  are  not  found
anywhere else in this world. Many subjects were briefly discussed by Lord Kåñëa when
He  spoke  the  Bhagavad-gétä  to  Arjuna.  In  the  Uddhava-gétä  these  subjects  are  dealt
with  more  elaborately,  and  they  are  explained  in  a  way  that  they  can  be  practically
applied.  We  can  understand  that  although  Lord  Kåñëa  spoke  Bhagavad-gétä  on  the
battlefield of Kuruksetra in just about forty-five minutes, He spoke to Uddhava while
comfortably seated beneath a banyan tree and thus was able to impart more detailed and
confidential instructions. Being at ease, Uddhava was free to pose numerous technical
questions  on  a  variety  of  subject  matters  pertaining  to  the  perfection  of  spiritual  life,
and the Lord replied without constraints.
It is our great fortune to be able to present the Uddhava-gétä, which is contained
within the Eleventh Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, as a separate book. Eleventh Canto
of  Çrémad-Bhägavatam  has  been  described  as  the  crown  on  the  head  of  the  Lord.
Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the literary incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and beginning the study of that great literature with the First Canto is considered to be
meditation upon the lotus feet of the Lord.
This  present  edition  presents  the  commentaries  of  two  great  Vaiñëava  masters  in
our disciplic succession—that of Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarti Thäkura and that of Çréla
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
Bhaktisiddhanta  Sarasvati  Thäkura,  the  spiritual  master  of  His  Divine  Grace  A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, who revealed Lord Krsna to the entire world while
distributing  His  sacred  teachings,  culminating  in  the  Uddhava-gétä.  Both  these  great
Vaisnava  masters,  Çréla  Viçvanätha  Cakravarti  Thäkura  and  Srila  Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakura, need no introduction as their names speak volumes for the followers
of Çré Caitanya Mahaprabhu. They played prominent roles in the movement to propagate
the teachings of Lord Kåñëa and Lord Caitanya throughout the modern world.
Although I am a most insignificant creature, I pray that the publication of this book
will bring delight to the dear devotees of the Lord, and shed some enlightenment upon
the bewildered people of this world. In this way, I hope to be greatly benefited.
Hoping  to  remain  the  servant  of  the  servant  of  those  who  are  aspiring  to  be  the
servants of the Lord.
Isvara dasa.
Completed in Sri Mayapur Dham, Rama Navami, 2007.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord KrIshna InstruCts uddhava
CHAPTER SUMMARY
This chapter describes how Uddhava requested the Lord to grant him permission
to  go  back  to  Godhead  and  how,  in  response,  the  Lord  suggested  that  he  take  to  the
renounced  order  of  life.  It  also  deals  with  the  avadhüta’s  description  of  twenty-four
spiritual masters.
After  hearing  the  prayerful  request  of  Uddhava,  Çré  Kåñëa  revealed  to  him  His
desire to return to His eternal abode since the purpose of His appearance in this world
had been fulfilled. The Lord also indicated that soon after His disappearance, Kali will
create great disturbances in the world. So Uddhava should take sannyäsa, fix his mind
upon  Him,  and  live  in  this  temporary  world  without  attachment,  while  acting  as  the
benefactor  of  all  living  entities.  Uddhava  replied  by  saying  that  apart  from  devotees
of  the  Lord,  detachment  from  matter,  which  is  the  cause  of  spiritual  advancement,  is
extremely difficult for those who are very attached to sense gratification. He requested
the  Lord  to  give  him  some  instructions  so  that  materialistic  people  who  consider  the
body as the self could attain perfection.
Uddhava  told  the  Lord  that  he  had  taken  shelter  of  Him  as  the  only  instructor
because  He  is  free  from  all  faults,  omniscient,  the  Lord  of  Vaikuëöha,  and  the  friend
of all living entities. After hearing Uddhava’s request, the Supreme Lord said that the
spirit  soul  is  himself  can  act  as  his  spiritual  master  and  thus  the  human  form  of  life
is  very  dear  to  Him.  In  this  connection,  the  Lord  related  to  Uddhava  a  conversation
between an avadhüta and King Yadu that took place long ago.
Chapter 1
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
10 Chapter 1
Once, King Yadu, the son of Yayäti, happened to see an avadhüta who was happily
wandering  about  here  and  there,  sometimes  acting  like  a  materialist,  sometimes  like
a  madman,  and  sometimes  like  one  haunted  by  a  ghost.  When  King  Yadu  asked  the
avadhüta  about  the  cause  of  his  ecstatic  wanderings,  he  replied  that  he  was  traveling
throughout  the  world  as  he  like,  after  having  received  instructions  from  twenty-four
spiritual masters, such as the earth, air, sky, water, and fire. Due to these instructions, he
was able to wander over the earth in a liberated condition of life.
From the earth, he learned how to become steady. He also learnt from the mountains
and trees of the earth how to do good to others—how to live in this world only for the
sake of other’s benefit.
From the life air, he learned how to remain satisfied with whatever is easily achieved
for keeping the body and soul together. In addition, from the external air, he learned
how to remain aloof from bodily sense enjoyment.
From the sky, he learned that the spirit soul, which is all-pervading throughout the
body, is always pure and free from any contamination.
From water, he learned how to remain naturally pure and sanctified.
From  fire,  he  learned  to  eat  anything  and  yet  not  become  contaminated.  He  also
learnt  that  a  charitable  person  will  never  face  inauspiciousness.  He  learned  that  the
spirit soul is that which illuminates every material body, and that the appearance and
disappearance of the living entity at the times of birth and death is unseen.
From the moon, he learned how the material body develops and then dwindles.
From  the  sun,  he  learned  how,  despite  remaining  in  contact  with  the  objects  of
enjoyment, one can remain unentangled. He also learned to see how the spirit soul is
unchangeable while the material body is simply a designation.
From the pigeon, he learned about the consequences of too much affection for one’s
family. A person who, in spite of receiving the human form of life, which is considered
the gateway to liberation, becomes attached to family life like a pigeon, will certainly fall
down, even though he has attained a superior platform after much struggle.
çré-bhagavän uväca
yad ättha mäà mahä-bhäga tac-cikérñitam eva me
brahmä bhavo loka-päläù svar-väsaà me ’bhikäìkñiëaù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Supreme Lord said: O most fortunate Uddhava, what you have ascertained about
My  desire  to  destroy  the  Yadu  dynasty  and  then  return  to  Vaikuëöha  is  correct.  This
is actually My desire, and Brahmä, Çiva, and the other demigods are praying for Me to
return to My abode in Vaikuëöha.
COMMENTARY BY ÇRÉLA VIÇVANÄTHA CAKRAVARTÉ ÖHÄKURA
The word svarväsa in this verse means “residence in Vaikuëöha.”
PURPORT BY ÇRÉLA BHAKTISIDDHÄNTA SARASVATÉ ÖHÄKURA
The  word  svarväsa  refers  to  the  planets  where  the  demigods  reside.  Although
Lord Viñëu is sometimes counted among the demigods, His residence is in Vaikuëöha.
The heavenly planets created by the Lord’s external potency, Maya, are different from
His  abode.  Lord  Viñëu  is  the  supreme  controller  of  all  controllers.  From  Him  all  the
demigods have manifested but they are under the control of Maya, whereas Lord Viñëu
is the controller of Maya. The Supreme Lord, Viñëu, is the root of all existence and the
material world is just a dim reflection of His eternal, spiritual abode. He is one without
a second and the original source of all spiritual and material manifestations. Lord Viñëu
is a  plenary  expansion of Lord  Kåñëa, the original source of all viñëu-tattva and jéva-
tattva expansions.
mayä niñpäditaà hy atra deva-käryam açeñataù
yad-artham avatérëo ’ham aàçena brahmaëärthitaù
The  mission  for  which  I  descended  on  this  earth,  along  with  My  plenary  portion,
Balaräma—the noble act of diminishing the burden of the earth because of the prayerful
request of Brahmä—has now been fulfilled.
COMMENTARY
The world aàçena means, “with Balaräma.”
1  From now on, all commentaries are by Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, and
all purports are by Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
12 Chapter 1
PURPORT
The  word  aàçena  generally  means  “incomplete.”  It  indicates  an  incompatible
situation  within  the  material  kingdom.  But,  in  the  realm  of  spiritual  variegatedness,
this word refers to the inseparable portions of the Supreme Lord.
kulaà vai çäpa-nirdagdhaà naìkñyaty anyonya-vigrahät
samudraù saptame hy enäà puréà ca plävayiñyati
Now, as a result of the brähmaëas’ curse, the Yadu dynasty will be annihilated in a
fratricidal war, and on the seventh day from today, the ocean will overflood the city of
Dvärakä.
yarhy eväyaà mayä tyakto loko ’yaà nañöa-maìgalaù
bhaviñyaty acirät sädho kalinäpi niräkåtaù
O saintly Uddhava, I will soon abandon this earth. Thereafter, being overwhelmed by
the age of Kali, the earth will become bereft of all piety.
PURPORT
Simply  by  the  advent  of  Kåñëa,  the  entire  world  became  filled  with  all  kinds  of
auspiciousness.  Wherever  there  is  no  existence  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  the  path  of
argument is prominent and the path of disciplic succession is attacked. Çré Kåñëa, who
enjoys  variegated  spiritual  pastimes,  is  an  ocean  of  nectarean  mellows.  Wherever  a
relationship with Kåñëa is absent, useless mental speculation becomes prominent, which
creates quarrel due to the influence of Kali. If the existence of the Supreme Lord is not
realized,  people  who  are  deceived  by  the  illusory  energy  of  the  Lord  are  made  to  run
after the path of mental speculation and dry argument.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
na vastavyaà tvayaiveha mayä tyakte mahé-tale
jano ’bhadra-rucir bhadra bhaviñyati kalau yuge
My dear Uddhava, you should not remain on the earth after I return to My eternal
abode  in  the  spiritual  sky  because  Kali-yuga  will  influence  human  beings  so  that  they
will become accustomed to performing all kinds of sinful activities. For this reason, you
should not remain here.
PURPORT
Human beings in the age of Kali are very interested in pursuing sinful propensities
because they are unaware of the advent of the Supreme Lord. So, the devotees of the
Supreme  Lord,  who  are  sober  and  gentle,  do  not  wish  to  live  in  this  world,  which  is
covered  by  the  darkness  of  ignorance  and  is  devoid  of  a  loving  relationship  with  the
Supreme Lord. One of the symptoms of a devotee is that he takes pleasure in residing at
a place where the Lord enacts His pastimes. Thus, Lord Kåñëa advised Uddhava not to
remain on earth in Kali-yuga.
tvaà tu sarvaà parityajya snehaà sva-jana-bandhuñu
mayy äveçya manaù saàyak sama-dåg vicarasva gäm
Now, you should completely give up all attachment to your friends and relatives and
fix your mind on Me. Thus being always conscious of Me, you should observe all things
with equal vision while wandering throughout the world.
COMMENTARY
Lord Kåñëa thought as follows: “While remaining on the earth, I satisfied the desires
of  all  those  who  sincerely  wanted  to  see  Me.  I  married  many  thousands  of  women,
headed  by  Rukmiëé,  whom  I  had  kidnapped,  and  I  killed  many  demons  in  various
places  and  by  various  contrivances.  I  attended  the  religious  functions  organized  by
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
14 Chapter 1
My  friends  and  relatives,  so  that  I  have  performed  many  wonderful  pastimes  for  the
satisfaction of My devotees.”
“I gave My personal association to all the great devotees in the lower planets. Just to
please My mother, Devaké, I return her six dead sons, who had been killed by Kaàsa, I
went to Sutala and blessed My great devotee, Bali Mahäräja. To return the dead son of
My spiritual master, Sändépani Muni, I personally went to Yamaräja, and thus gave him
My audience. I even benedicted the residents of heaven with My personal association
when  I  went  there  to  take  the  pärijäta  flower  for  My  wife,  Satyabhämä.  I  traveled  to
Mahä-vaikuëöhaloka, to recover the dead children of a brähmaëa. In this way, all the
devotees who sincerely desired to see Me received the fulfillment of their desires.”
“However,  Nara-Näräyaëa  Åñi  and  the  great  sages  who  reside  with  Him  at
Badarikäçrama, although hoping to see Me, never had their desire fulfilled. I have been
on this earth for 125 years and so the duration of My stay has reached its limit. Being busy
with My pastimes, I had no time to see these great sages. And yet, Uddhava is almost as
good as Me. He is a pure devotee who has been awarded My transcendental opulence.
I  therefore  consider  him  to  be  the  right  person  for  Me  to  send  to  Badarikäçrama.  I
shall impart transcendental knowledge to Uddhava, so that anyone who receives it from
him  will  become  detached  from  material  existence.  He  is  the  right  person  to  impart
this  knowledge  to  the  sages  at  Badarikäçrama.  He  can  teach  them  the  procedures  for
rendering devotional service unto Me. Loving devotional service rendered to Me is the
most valuable treasure available in this world. By receiving this knowledge, the desires
of Nara-Näräyaëa and the other great sages will be fulfilled.”
“The great souls who have surrendered unto Me are enriched with transcendental
knowledge and detachment from the material world. Sometimes, being fully engaged in
My devotional service, they may seemingly forget Me, but a pure devotee who possesses
love  for  Me  will  always  be  protected  by  his  sincere  devotion.  Even  if  such  a  devotee
unexpectedly meets with death while forgetting to keep his mind fixed upon Me, his
love for Me is so strong that it will give him protection so that he will eventually attain
My  lotus  feet,  which  are  beyond  the  vision  of  materialistic  persons.  Uddhava  is  My
pure devotee because he can never give up My association.”
While  contemplating  in  this  way,  Çré  Kåñëa  inspired  Çrémän  Uddhava  to  inquire
about transcendental knowledge, renunciation, and devotional service to Him. He said
to  Uddhava,  “You  should  give  up  affection  for  your  relatives  and  friends  in  the  Yadu
dynasty.” This affection of Uddhava towards the members of the Yadu dynasty are of
two types.
1. Bodily relationship with the Yadus.
2. Relationship in regard to Kåñëa.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Among the two, Uddhava is advised give up the former. The Lord will explain to
Uddhava how to give up this attachment. As far as the latter relationship is concerned,
Uddhava is incapable of giving it up. This relationship is not condemned. Uddhava is
certainly aware of Kåñëa’s mentality.
PURPORT
The  devotees  of  the  Lord  are  equipoised  because  they  see  all  material  objects  in
relationship  with  Kåñëa.  Those  whose  hearts  are  steady  do  not  become  entangled  in
material affection, in the form of aversion to Kåñëa, and thus do not consider their non-
devotee relatives as the object of their sense gratification. Since those persons, who see
everything in relation to Kåñëa, wander about in this world while giving up the urges of
the mind, speech, and body, they are fit to be called devotees of the Lord, or Gosvämés.
The purport of the brahmabhüta prasannätmä verse of the Bhagavad-gétä is the perfect
example of seeing all objects with equal vision.
yad idaà manasä väcä cakñurbhyäà çravaëädibhiù
naçvaraà gåhyamäëaà caviddhi mäyä-mano-mayam
My  dear  Uddhava,  know  for  certain  that  this  material  world  which  you  perceive
through your mind, speech, eyes, ears and other senses is an illusory creation that one
imagines to be real due to the influence of Maya. You should know that all of the objects
of the material senses are temporary.
COMMENTARY
The question may be raised, “What kind of equal vision should Uddhava have?” In
reply to this, Lord Kåñëa said, “O Uddhava, this material world, which is the object of
the senses, such as the mind, speech, eyes, and ears, is temporary and perishable.”
PURPORT
Any  information  received  from  this  material  body,  which  consists  of  the  five
knowledge-acquiring  senses,  the  five  working  senses,  and  the  mind,  is  limited  and
destroyed  by  time  because  of  its  temporary  nature.  The  spirit  soul  coming  in  contact
with  the  material  body  develops  material  designations  and  desires  the  insignificant
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
16 Chapter 1
enjoyment  that  is  associated  with  this  temporary  material  world.  As  a  result  of  this
misconception, he is bereft of the service of the Supreme Lord.
puàso ’yuktasya nänärtho bhramaù sa guëa-doña-bhäk
karmäkarma-vikarmeti guëa-doña-dhiyo bhidä
That person whose mind is bewildered by illusion perceives many differences in value
and  meaning  among  material  objects.  Thus,  one  engages  constantly  on  the  platform  of
material good and evil and is bound by such conceptions. Absorbed in material duality,
such  a  person  contemplates  the  performance  of  compulsory  duties,  nonperformance  of
such duties, and the performance of forbidden activities.
COMMENTARY
An elaboration of the topics described in the previous verse is being given here. The
living entities sometimes fall into the trap of duality. They think: “This is prescribed,
therefore  better;  that  is  faulty,  therefore  inferior.”  This  is  the  conception  of  ignorant
people. For the fallen souls, what is superior and what is inferior? King Citraketu has
said that all objects in this material world are insignificant. Therefore, it is difficult to
ascertain which one is a curse, which one is a favor, which one is heaven, which one is
hell, which one is happiness, and which one is distress. The faults and qualities of objects
are  attributed  to  them  by  the  Vedas  when  it  says  that  prescriptions  are  qualities  and
prohibitions are faults. This is a fact. The Vedas have described these subject matters for
the benefit of the people who are in ignorance. Karma refers to those activities which
are approved by the Vedas, akarma means to not perform those activities, and vikarma
refers to those activities which are prohibited by the Vedas. Those who find faults and
qualities are certainly ignorant.
PURPORT
Mental  speculators  distance  themselves  from  the  consideration  of  the  Absolute
Truth and engage in enjoying various sense objects, being bereft of the service of the
nondual substance, the son of the king of Vraja. That is not the constitutional propensity
of  the  spirit  soul.  That  is  the  illusion  of  the  unsuccessful  yogis.  Being  controlled  by
the conception of faults and qualities, such people accept a few temporary activities as
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
prescriptions, and a few activities as prohibition. In this way, they attribute superiority
and inferiority to various objects. But, if all objects are seen in relation to Kåñëa, such
distinctions will not arise. In order to attain liberation from such conceptions that are
based on finding faults and attributing qualities, the topic of brahma-gäyatré has been
described. Spiritual knowledge means knowledge with practical application. If one does
not  know  the  mystery  of  this,  then  he  is  sure  to  fall  into  illusion.  Thus,  he  attributes
faults  and  qualities  to  different  persons  and  addresses  them  as  satkarmé,  vikarmé,  and
kukarmé.
tasmäd yuktendriya-grämo yukta-citta idam jagat
ätmanékñasva vitatam ätmänaà mayy adhéçvare
Therefore,  you  should  control  your  mind  and  senses  and  see  this  material  world,
which is full of happiness and distress, as situated within the self, and also see that this
individual self is situated within Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
COMMENTARY
Therefore, you should regulate your senses and understand that this material world,
which is full of happiness and distress, is situated within the living entity as their object
of enjoyment. You should also see this material world, as well as the spirit soul, as being
under the full subordination of the Supersoul, which is one of My features.
PURPORT
By  executing  devotional  service,  all  of  one’s  senses  become  properly  engaged.
Then  only  can  one  realize  that  Kåñëa  is  the  controller  of  all,  and  that  He  is  situated
within everybody as the Supersoul. At that time, all the senses become engaged in the
service  of  the  master  of  the  senses  and  thus  become  free  from  material  designations.
Impersonalists try to cease all sense enjoyment, thinking that in the perfectional stage,
the  living  entities  become  inert.  However,  such  self-abnegation  simply  denies  one  the
opportunity to realize the Absolute Truth with transcendental senses. The fact is that
the master of the senses, Kåñëa, who is the only proper object of all the senses, is realized
by rendering devotional service with all the senses.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
18 Chapter 1
Because  the  conditioned  souls  have  rejected  their  constitutional  position,  and
because  they  want  to  enjoy  without  God  in  this  material  world,  which  is  created  by
the  illusory  energy  of  the  Lord,  they  fall  into  bewilderment,  thinking  themselves  as
something other than eternal servants of the Supreme Lord, or as instruments for the
Lord’s service. That is why Çré Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, instructed
His pure devotee, Uddhava, just as Prahläda instructed his father, Hinranyakaçipu.
Attached  householders,  who  do  not  see  how  everything  is  related  to  Kåñëa,  are
perpetually deceived so that they cannot see the Supreme Lord as He is, because they
are driven by their uncontrolled senses. Lord Viñëu is the ultimate goal of all the senses.
The conditioned soul’s propensity to enjoy the material senses is nothing but the spirit
of enjoyment that is averse to devotional service.
When Kåñëa, the son of the king of Vraja, who is one without a second, becomes
the only object of all the senses then the temporary propensity of the material senses is
checked and the spiritual propensity for serving the Supreme Lord with purified senses
is  awakened.  Because  there  are  no  longer  any  material  designations  in  that  state  of
perfection,  the  distinction  between  the  body  and  the  self,  between  the  form  and  the
owner  of  the  form,  and  between  the  qualities  and  the  owner  of  qualities,  cannot  be
experienced.
The  Supreme  Lord  is  the  only  object  of  worship  for  everyone.  He  is  the  object
of  service  for  everyone  and  the  object  of  service  of  all  the  senses  of  everyone.  The
abomination  in  the  form  of  unwanted  conceptions  that  bring  about  inauspiciousness
in the variegated activities of this material world cannot influence the servant of the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Vrajendra-nandana.  On  the  spiritual  platform,  the
considerations  of  çuddha-dvaita,  dvaitädvaita,  viçiñtädvaita  and  çuddhädvaita  appear
to  be  situated  on  the  same  platform  so  that  the  ekäyana  system  is  not  obstructed.
When  the  philosophy  of  acintyabhedäbheda  is  revealed,  the  spirit  souls  are  not  seen
as  distinct  from  the  associates  of  the  Lord  who  assist  Him  in  His  pastimes.  On  that
platform, the pure spirit soul thinks himself as a servant of Kåñëa and thus engages in
His devotional service. Unless one sees all objects in relation to Kåñëa, there is bound
to  be  inauspiciousness.  That  is  why  the  devotees  of  the  Lord  consider  uninterrupted
service to Kåñëa as the constitutional and awakened propensity of the spirit soul.
People  who  cannot  realize  the  Supreme  Lord,  the  enjoyer  of  transcendental
pastimes, become separated from Lord Acyuta and thus become faithful to temporary
and  imaginary  objects.  This  is  due  to  not  understanding  the  essential  characteristics
of the Supreme Lord. In order to open the eyes of such blind people, the Lord, as the
supreme instructor, expressed His desire to guide Uddhava, and other similar servants
of Uddhava, who have no interest in the karma-käëòa system of the Vedas, by giving
them invaluable instructions.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
atmänubhava-tuñöätmä näntaräyair vihanyase
Being fully endowed with conclusive knowledge of the Vedas, and having realized the
ultimate purpose of such knowledge in practice, you will be able to perceive the pure self
and become self-satisfied. In this way, you will become dear to all living beings, headed by
the demigods, and you will never be obstructed by any impediment.
COMMENTARY
If  one  does  not  act  with  a  mind  fixed  on  Kåñëa,  then  the  demigods  will  create
obstacles. This is being explained here. The word jïäna means, “ascertaining the purport
of the Vedas.” The word vijïäna means, “to realize that purport.” One must posses both.
When one is self-realized, one automatically becomes satisfied. In that condition, one
becomes the object of affection of those who have demigod bodies. This is confirmed
in the Vedas wherein it is stated, ätmähyeñaà sa bhavatéti, “such a soul is very joyful.”
Thereafter, the demigods no longer create any disturbance.
PURPORT
Due to lack of knowledge regarding the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vrajendra-
nandana, who is one without a second, the impersonalists cannot understand that both
the object of worship and the worshipers are situated in the eternal spiritual kingdom.
But, because the eternal devotees of Kåñëa, who accept the personal form of the Lord
and who are expert in seeing spiritual variegatedness, are blissful due to realizing their
service  to  Kåñëa,  they  become  liberated  from  the  conception  of  seeing  the  difference
between the body and the owner of the body. In such a state, the insignificance of the
four objectives of life is exposed. Those who are devoid of love for Hari, and who glorify
the concept of impersonalism, which is a snare of Hari’s illusory energy, Maya, face an
impediment  in  their  path  of  self-realization.  As  a  result,  they  bring  about  their  own
ruination, as did Kaàsa, Jaräsandha, and so on. Theoretical knowledge can be purified
when it is practically applied.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
20 Chapter 1
doña-buddhyobhayätéto niñedhän na nivartate
guëa-buddhyä ca vihitaà na karoti yathärbhakaù
One who has attained the transcendental platform, beyond the influence of material
dualities,  such  as  good  and  evil,  will  automatically  follow  religious  principles  and  avoid
sinful  acts.  A  self-realized  soul  acts  in  this  way  without  separate  endeavor,  just  like
an  innocent  child,  and  not  because  he  considers  everything  in  terms  of  a  materialistic
conception of good and evil.
COMMENTARY
Less-intelligent people cannot act properly. Wise men, who are beyond the concept
of  finding  faults  and  qualities,  automatically  give  up  activities  that  are  prohibited  by
the  scriptures,  even  though  they  no  longer  have  such  a  dualistic  outlook.  And,  they
automatically act in a way that is approved by the scriptures. As an innocent child acts
spontaneously and not under the influence of duality, the actions of a wise man are also
spontaneous.
PURPORT
From the external point of view, an innocent child, not knowing the consequences
of  an  action,  may  sometimes  appear  to  reject  sinful  activities  and  be  attracted  to
pious  activities,  as  when  a  child  spontaneously  exhibits  a  generous  nature.  Similarly,
transcendentalists do not become intoxicated by mundane knowledge. They are situated
beyond the mentality of finding faults and qualities and realize that Kåñëa alone is the
object of service.
sarva-bhüta-suhåc chänto jïäna-vijïäna-niçcayaù
paçyan mad-ätmakaà viçvaà na vipadyeta vai punaù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa Instructs Uddhava
The self-realized souls who are firmly fixed in knowledge and realization, and who are
equal to all living entities, know this material world as a manifestation of My energy, and
thus do not again become entangled in the bondage of material existence.
PURPORT
Self-realized souls see all objects of this world to be related to Kåñëa. They never fall
into material existence on account of their spirit of enjoyment. They make friendship
with all living entities, knowing them to be ingredients for Kåñëa’s worship. They are
naturally peaceful and undisturbed because of their expertise in the field of knowledge
and its practical application. No mundane temptation can distract their mind from the
lotus feet of Kåñëa. Those who fail to see this world as a house of happiness because of
their  unsuccessful  attempt  to  enjoy  this  world,  engage  in  fruitive  activities  to  achieve
material enjoyment. When they become disgusted with material enjoyment, they want
to temporarily renounce such enjoyment. That is why Çré Gaurasundara has instructed
about phalgu vairägya and yukta vairägya, which are confidential purports of Çrémad-
Bhägavatam, meant for the understanding of fortunate living entities.
´Î¯Ì¸d 3HÌ=
çré-çuka uväca
ity ädiñöo bhägavata mahä-bhägavato nåpa
uddhavaù praëipatyäha tattvaà jijïäsur acyutam
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said: O King, after Lord Kåñëa instructed Uddhava in this
way, the mahä-bhägavata, Uddhava, who had a desire to know the spiritual truth, offered
obeisances to the Lord and spoke as follows.
´Î3{H 3HÌ=
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
22 Chapter 1
çré-uddhava uväca
yogeça yoga-vinyäsa yogätman yoga-sambhava
niùçreyasäya me proktas tyägaù sannyäsa-lakñaëaù
Çré Uddhava said: My dear Lord, You award the fruit of yoga, You are the knower
of mystic yoga, You are the personification of yoga, and You are pleased by the execution
of  bhakti-yoga.  For  my  ultimate  benefit,  You  have  explained  to  me  the  procedure  for
accepting the renounced order of life.
COMMENTARY
O my Lord, You are Yogeçvara because You are the controller of karma-yoga, jïäna-
yoga,  and  bhakti-yoga.  You  are  yoga  vinyäsa,  meaning  that  You  are  imparting  to  me
the  knowledge  of  yoga,  although  I  am  unqualified  to  receive  it.  O  Yogätman,  You  are
the  personification  of  yoga.  So,  if  I  attain  You,  then  I  will  attain  all  types  of  mystic
yoga. Moreover, You will take birth in the house of a devotee because of his devotional
service. Therefore, please award devotional service to me in a special way.
PURPORT
Uddhava has addressed Lord Kåñëa in this verse as Yogeça. Çré Kåñëa alone is the
object  of  worship  and  He  alone  is  to  be  attained  through  the  practice  of  devotional
service. When one understands the characteristics of devotional service, one’s propensity
for enjoying mundane objects becomes vanquished.
Materialists are attached to hearing and chanting the topics of their wife and children.
Learned scholars are attached to hearing and chanting the topics of scriptural debates.
Yogés are attached to the distress produced from controlling their life air. Ascetics are
attached to their performance of austerities, and pseudo renunciates are attached to the
cultivation of dry, speculative knowledge. But, the servants of Çré Caitanya are always
fixed  in  the  path  of  bhakti-yoga.  Because  the  devotees  of  the  Lord  have  adopted  the
process of devotional service, which is inclusive of detachment, giving up other inferior
attachments, they are real renunciates, or yukta vairägis. That is why the Supreme Lord
is addressed here as Yogeça. Because the servants of Yogeçvara, like Uddhava, dovetail
all other yoga processes in the execution of bhakti-yoga, the Lord is addressed here as
yoga-vinyäsa.
Because the constitutional propensities of the living entities clearly manifest in the
practice of bhakti-yoga, the Lord is called Yogätmä. In addition, because He is the source
of all types of yoga, He is referred to as yoga-sambhava. Only persons who are situated in
devotional service achieve the supreme benefit of life and thus are able to properly give
up all non-devotional propensities. That is the most beneficial thing that can happen to
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
a spirit soul. Çré Kåñëa had mercifully taught this päramahaàsya-dharma, in the form
of bhakti-yoga, to Uddhava.
Renouncing the enjoyment of the fruits of one’s karma and rejecting the fruits
of jïäna, or the cultivation of impersonalism, cannot be the cause of the living entities’
ultimate benefit because such activities are temporary and dependent. Those who have
no interest in hearing the topics of the Supreme Lord are perpetually diverted from the
transcendental mellows as a result of being misguided by different yoga processes, such
as  haöha-yoga,  karma-yoga,  räja-yoga,  and  jïäna-yoga.  When  mundane  rasa  displays
prominence, then such people, in order to neutralize it, endeavor to practice different
kinds of mystic yoga processes and thus are perpetually bereft of bhakti-yoga.
tyägo ’yaà duñkaro bhüman kämänäà viñayätmabhiù
sutaräà tvayi sarvätmann abhaktair iti me matiù
My dear Lord, O Supersoul of all, I think that it is extremely difficult for those whose
minds  are  attached  to  sense  gratification,  and  who  are  bereft  of  devotion  unto  You,  to
renounce material desires.
COMMENTARY
If it is difficult to follow this process even for Your devotees whose minds are still
attached to material enjoyment, then there is no doubt that it must be very difficult for
the nondevotees.
PURPORT
Uddhava said: The devotees of the Supreme Lord never desire to accept anything
that has not been first offered to the Lord. Therefore, apart from the ingredients of the
Lord’s service, it is natural for them to give up the desire for enjoying objects that are not
related to the Lord. But, lusty non-devotees, who are busy collecting objects for sense
gratification  are  fit  to  be  called  materialists  because  they  have  no  propensity  for  the
Lord’s service. There is no possibility for such people to give up the desire for enjoying
objects that are not related to the Lord. This is my opinion.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
24 Chapter 1
so ’haà mamäham iti müòha-matir vigäòhas
tvan-mäyayä viracitätmani sänubandhe
tat tv aïjasä nigaditaà bhavatä yathähaà
saàsädhayämi bhagavann anuçädhi bhåtyam
My dear Lord, I am certainly foolish because I consider my body and bodily relations
to be all and all, even though these things are simply products of Your illusory energy.
Thus, I think, “I am this body and these relatives and possessions are mine.” My Lord,
please instruct Your foolish servant so that I can give up this illusion and surrender at
Your lotus feet.
COMMENTARY
“My mind is absorbed in mundane conceptions because I am attached to my body,
wife,  and  children,  which  are  created  by  Maya.  The  material  body  is  just  like  a  blind
well. Therefore, it is my first duty to protect myself from that well. Then, the knowledge
that will be gained by following the Lord’s instructions will automatically follow.” This
is the sum and substance of this verse.
PURPORT
Those who are attacked by nämäparädha in the form of maintaining the conception
of “I and mine,” pollute their real ego due to the influence of the illusory energy of the
Lord of Vaikuëöha. At that time, they display no power to follow the instruction of the
Supreme Lord because, due to lack of surrender, the living entities become bewildered
by  false  ego.  Due  to  the  influence  of  false  ego,  the  living  entities  become  averse  to
the  Supreme  Lord  and  are  then  bound  by  the  ropes  of  Maya.  On  that  platform,  the
constitutional  position  of  the  living  entities  becomes  covered.  In  other  words,  their
inclination towards the Lord’s service slows down considerably. This is why Uddhava is
praying to Kåñëa to remain situated in the service propensity without deviation.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
satyasya te sva-dåça ätmana ätmano ’nyaà
vaktäram éça vibudheñv api nänucakñe
sarve vimohita-dhiyas tava mäyayeme
brahmädayas tanu-bhåto bahir-artha-bhäväù
My  dear  Lord,  You  are  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  and  by  Your  mercy,
You reveal Yourself to the hearts of Your pure devotees. Other than You, I do not see
anyone  who  can  impart  to  me  perfect  knowledge.  You  are  the  perfect  teacher,  and  not
the  demigods  in  the  heavenly  planets.  In  fact,  the  demigods,  even  Lord  Brahmä,  are
bewildered by Your illusory energy, Maya. The demigods are also conditioned souls who
accept their material bodies and bodily expansions as ultimate reality.
COMMENTARY
The word satyasya in this verse has been used in the dative case, which means that
knowledge about the self has been produced from You because You are the basis of all
time, place, and circumstances. You are the Supersoul and I am different from You.
PURPORT
Although  the  Supreme  Lord  is  sometimes  counted  amongst  the  demigods,  He  is
nevertheless the self-manifest Absolute Truth, the Supersoul, and the eternal Personality
of  Godhead.  Although  partial  power  of  supremacy  of  the  Supreme  Lord  is  present  in
the Vaiñëava demigods, the moment they fail to display an eagerness for the service of
the  Supreme  Lord,  they  fall  down  from  the  worship  of  the  Lord  and  plunge  into  the
ocean  of  forgetfulness.  Therefore,  if  one  is  to  consider  the  position  of  the  demigods,
who are devoid of service to the Supreme Lord, one will find that they lack self-manifest
complete  knowledge.  From  this,  one  can  understand  that  the  Supersoul,  Lord  Viñëu,
is separate from the living entities, such as the demigods. Demigods like Brahmä, who
are approachable by human knowledge, have a difference between their body and their
self. All of them are bewildered by the illusory energy of Viñëu and consider the objects
of  the  external  world  as  the  goal  of  their  lives.  The  worshipers  of  the  demigods,  who
are attracted to the material sense objects—sound, touch, form, taste, and smell—are
similarly covered like their respective objects of worship, by the illusory energy of the
Lord,  Maya.  Aversion  to  the  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord  is  the  proof  of  their  non-
devotional endeavors. This statement of Uddhava is greatly admired by the servants of
Çré Caitanya. They do not consider Çré Caitanyadeva, who is non-different from the son
of the king of Vraja, to be merely a spiritual master, like Åñabhadeva or Vyäsadeva.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
26 Chapter 1
tasmäd bhavantam anavadyam ananta-päraà
sarva-jïam éçvaram akuëöha-vikuëöha-dhiñëyam
nirviëëa-dhér aham u he våjinäbhitapto
näräyaëaà nara-sakhaà çaraëaà prapadye
Therefore, O Lord, feeling weary of material life and tormented by its distresses, I now
surrender unto You because You are the perfect master. You are the same Näräyaëa, who
is beyond the influence of material time and space. You are the unlimited, all-knowing
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  whose  spiritual  abode  in  Vaikuëöha  is  free  from  all
disturbances.  You  are  free  from  all  faults  and  You  are  the  sole  benefactor  of  all  living
entities.
COMMENTARY
“O Lord, I am especially tortured by material miseries. Therefore, I surrender unto
You.”
Sometimes a person may possess all good qualities yet may commit sinful activities.
So, how to give up all material association is being described here. The Lord is unlimited
or He who has no end. In other words, the Lord is beyond the influence of material time
and space.
“Some people are ungrateful but You are not so. You are omniscient. Some people
cannot  give  protection  but  You  are  not  like  that.  You  are  the  supreme  controller.
Some people are a source of inauspiciousness but You are not like that. Your abode of
Vaikuëöha is free from anxiety, and the material time factor. You are Näräyaëa. You are
the supreme shelter of even the puruñävatäras. You are most compassionate because You
are the ever well-wisher of all living entities. You appear in this world simply to exhibit
Your mercy to the conditioned souls.”
PURPORT
O  Lord,  the  demigods  fulfill  our  desires.  Because  the  demigods  who  supply  our
necessities  are  not  omniscient,  rather  they  are  limited  living  entities  of  this  material
world created by Maya, You are actually the true friend of all living entities. Because I
have a tendency to commit sinful activities and I am greedy, I have no other alternative
than to take shelter at Your lotus feet.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
çré-bhagavän uväca
präyeëa manujä loke loka-tattva-vicakñaëäù
samuddharanti hy ätmänam ätmanaiväçubhäçayät
The  Supreme  Lord  said:  Generally,  persons  who  are  able  to  understand  the  truth  of
this material world try to elevate themselves beyond such a life of inauspiciousness, which
simply consists of gross sense gratifcation.
COMMENTARY
Lord Çré Kåñëa replied to Uddhava: You are thinking yourself to be a fool. But,
I do not find a wise man like you among all learned persons. It is seen in this world that
some people who are inferior to you attain spiritual knowledge on the strength of their
own intelligence even without accepting instructions from their spiritual master. But,
you are the crest jewel among all wise men. You know the spiritual science instructed by
Me. Often many experienced people who are aware of the consequences of auspicious
and  inauspicious  activities  cannot  deliver  themselves  from  the  inauspicious  desire  of
material enjoyment.
PURPORT
Only those who give up all endeavors to satisfy the demands of the body and mind,
which  are  opposite  to  their  constitutional  positions,  are  actually  self-realized,  and  are
able to deliver themselves from the desire for material enjoyment.
ätmano gurur ätmaiva puruñasya viçeñataù
yat pratyakñänumänäbhyäà çreyo ’säv anuvindate
O Uddhava, the self is the foremost spiritual master of the human beings because
the  self  can  attain  supreme  auspiciousness  on  the  strength  of  his  direct  and  indirect
perceptions.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
28 Chapter 1
COMMENTARY
A person can sometimes achieve the highest auspiciousness directly, and sometimes
through indirect perception.
PURPORT
The  conditioned  state  can  never  create  inauspiciousness  to  those  who  are  self-
realized.  Therefore,  self-realized  souls  accept  the  Supersoul  as  their  spiritual  master,
without being entangled in the material conception of life. Such self-realized liberated
souls, though living in this world, actually attain auspiciousness by using the two kinds
of evidence—direct and indirect perception.
puruñatve ca mäà dhéräù säìkhya-yoga-viçäradäù
ävistaräà prapaçyanti sarva-çakty-upabåàhitam
Those  who  are  expert  in  the  science  of  säìkhya-yoga,  and  are  self-controlled,  can
directly see Me, along with all My potencies.
COMMENTARY
Many  among  such  human  beings  can  realize  Me.  Those  who  are  sober  and  non-
envious  can  certainly  understand  Me.  Those  who  know  säìkhya-yoga  and  bhakti-
yoga  can  also  realize  Me.  It  is  stated  in  the  çåuti:  puruñatve  cävistaräm  ätmä  sahita-
prajïänena  sampanna-tamo  vijïätaà  vadati  vijïätaà  paçyati  veda  çvastanaà  veda
lokälokau  martyenämåtam  épsaty  evaà  sampanno  ’thetareñäà  paçünäm  äsanä-pipäse
eväbhijïänam. “The human form of life is endowed with sufficient intelligence so that
one can imbibe transcendental knowledge. While in the human form of life, one can
speak about his realizations, see the truth of material existence, understand the future
consequences of his actions, and thus appreciate the existence not only of this world,
but  also  the  next.  By  experiencing  the  futility  of  material  existence,  the  soul  in  the
human form can inquire about immortality. This is the purpose of human life because
the human body can enable one to achieve perfection. When a human being becomes
advanced  by  spiritual  practice, he will see the  futility of the activities of the  animals,
which are simply eating, sleeping, mating and defending.”
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
PURPORT
People who are maddened by material enjoyment consider all visible articles as the
objects  of  their  temporary  sense  enjoyment.  They  consider  the  Supreme  Lord  to  be
impotent,  and  thus  deny  His  existence.  But,  those  steady  and  thoughtful  people  who
have mastered the science of self-realization and devotional service realize that the all-
powerful Supreme Lord is present in every object.
bahvyaù santi puraù såñöäs täsäà me pauruñé priyä
In  this  material  world,  there  are  varieties  of  created  bodies—some  with  one  leg,
others with two legs, three legs, four legs, many legs, and still others with no legs. Among
all such bodies, the human form is very dear to Me because it awards one the ultimate
goal of life.
COMMENTARY
Now, the Lord is glorifying the human body by saying, “one leg, etc.”
PURPORT
According to their karma, the conditioned souls receive different types of bodies.
Because they are materially conditioned, they accept their material body to be their self.
Among all such bodies, the human form is dear to the Supreme Lord because only in the
human form is one capable of achieving the ultimate goal of life.
atra mäà mågayanty addhä yuktä hetubhir éçvaram
gåhyamäëair guëair liìgair agrähyam anumänataù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
30 Chapter 1
Although My form is not directly seen by ordinary sense perception, those situated in
human life may use their intelligence and other faculties of perception to directly search
for Me through both apparent and indirectly ascertained symptoms.
COMMENTARY
“The  living  entities  who  have  received  human  forms  can  directly  search  for  Me,
the  supreme  controller  of  all.  The  devotees  worship  Me  by  the  process  of  devotional
service, beginning with hearing and chanting. I have already stated that I am known
only through devotional service.”
Now,  the  question  may  arise  that  since  the  Lord  is  the  source  of  everything,
including  the  intelligence,  how  can  one  realize  Him  through  sense  perception  and
mental speculation? The answer is that guesswork undertaken by use of intelligence is
unacceptable. By such guesswork, the dependent living entity tries to reach a conclusion
but  the  independent  Supersoul  is  not  fully  realized  by  such  a  process.  The  Supreme
Lord, Kåñëa, is beyond the reach of dry arguments. His forms, qualities, pastimes, and
opulence  are  all  inconceivable.  Therefore,  He  is  not  realized  through  indirect  sense
perception.
PURPORT
Only human beings can realize the existence of the Supreme Lord with the help of
direct and indirect perception, after seeing cause and effect, temporary and permanent
nature, and the external and internal causes in this material world.
aträpy udäharantémam itihäsaà purätanam
avadhütasya saàvädaà yador amita-tejasaù
Now I will relate to you a historical narration concerning a conversation between the
greatly powerful King Yadu and a most intelligent avadhüta.
COMMENTARY
Now I will relate to you an ancient conversation that took place between an avadhüta
and King Yadu, which will shed light on your understanding of the Supersoul.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
avadhütaà dviyaà kaïcic carantam akuto-bhayam
kavià nirékñya taruëaà yaduù papraccha dharma-vit
Once upon a time, Mahäräja Yadu, who himself was most learned in spiritual science,
saw an avadhüta brähmaëa who appeared to be young and wise, wandering about fearlessly.
Mahäräja Yadu took the opportunity and inquired from the brähmaëa as follows.
³Î¯Ì"¸²HÌ=
çré-yadur uväca
kuto buddhir iyaà brahmann akartuù su-viçäradä
yäm äsädya bhaväl lokaà vidväàç carati bäla-vat
Çré Yadu said: O brähmaëa, I can see that you are not practicing any kind of spiritual
discipline  and  yet  you  have  gained  perfect  understanding  of  everything  and  everyone
within  this  world.  Kindly  tell  me  how  you  developed  your  extraordinary  intelligence.
Why do you wander over the earth, behaving as if you were a mere child?
präyo dharmärtha-kämeñu vivitsäyäà ca mänaväù
hetunaiva saméhanta äyuño yaçasaù çriyaù
People  in  this  world  often  cultivate  religiosity,  economic  development,  and  sense
gratification, and also the science of self-realization, and their usual motive is to achieve a
long duration of life, acquire fame, and enjoy material opulence.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
32 Chapter 1
COMMENTARY
Although  they  desire  to  know  about  religiosity,  economic  development,  sense
gratification, and the self, people in general think that these will benefit them with a
long duration of life, and so on.
tvaà tu kalpaù kavir dakñaù su-bhago ’måta-bhäñaëaù
na kartä nehase kiïcij jaòonmatta-piçäca-vat
Although  you  are  able,  wise,  expert,  handsome,  and  a  sweet  speaker,  you  are  not
engaged in doing anything. Rather, you appear to be acting like an inert madman, as if
you were a ghostly creature.
COMMENTARY
Yadu, the son of Yayäti, is saying: You are not the performer of any action, and you
do not want anything. It is not that you are not doing anything because of ignorance—
you are capable. It is not that you lack expertise—you are expert in all activities. It is
not that you are ugly and hence, you do not wish to associate with a woman—you are
handsome.  You  speak  less.  It  is  not  that  you  are  not  a  learned  person  but  you  do  not
wish to converse with anyone. O brähmaëa, despite all these, why are you behaving like
a dumb person?
janeñu dahyamäneñu käma-lobha-davägninä
na tapyase ’gninä mukto gaìgämbhaù-stha iva dvipaù
Although human beings in this world are burning in the forest fire of lust and greed,
you remain free and are not burned by that fire. You appear to be like a peaceful elephant
in the midst of the water of the cooling Ganges.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
COMMENTARY
You  are  young  and  still,  you  are  not  afflicted  by  lusty  desires.  What  is  the  reason
behind this? People in this world are always suffering from lust, greed, and so on. However,
you are free from such suffering and thus appear to be like an elephant standing in the
water of the Ganges.
PURPORT
There is abundance of water in the Ganges. The water of the Ganges can extinguish
any fire. As the waves of the Ganges can extinguish the fire of lust of an intoxicated
elephant  and  make  him  peaceful,  although  human  beings  in  this  world  are  always
disturbed  by  enemies,  such  as  lust,  you  are  an  avadhüta.  And,  because  you  are  not
overwhelmed by lusty desires, you are not disturbed by the fire of lust, like an elephant
situated in the water.
tvaà hi naù påcchatäà brahmann ätmany änanda-käraëam
brühi sparça-vihénasya bhavataù kevalätmanaù
O great brähmaëa, I see that you are devoid of any contact with material enjoyment
and that you are traveling alone, without any companions or wife and children. Therefore,
because I am sincerely inquiring from you, please tell me the cause of the great ecstasy
that you feel within yourself.
COMMENTARY
According to the logic that one who has a mouth will speak, I wish to know from
where  you  are  getting  this  unlimited  happiness.  You  are  completely  aloof  from  sense
enjoyment but still, you are receiving so much happiness.
PURPORT
The  sense  objects—form,  taste,  smell,  sound,  and  touch—cannot  attack  those
liberated souls who are fully engaged in the devotional service of the Supreme Lord, and
who are freed from the desire for material enjoyment. Those who are attached to material
form, taste, and so on, become entangled by the affection of their wife and children. You
are an avadhüta and so I want to know why you are experiencing transcendental bliss,
even though you are not intoxicated by worldly happiness.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
34 Chapter 1
çré-bhagavän uväca
yadunaivaà mahä-bhägo brahmaëyena su-medhasä
påñöaù sabhäjitaù präha praçrayävanataà dvijaù
The Supreme Lord said: When the avadhüta brähmaëa was thus respected and spoken
to in this way by the intelligent King Yadu, who was the benefactor of the brähmaëas,
being pleased with the king’s respectful attitude, he began to humbly reply.
COMMENTARY
The  Supreme  Lord  said:  O  most  fortunate  Uddhava,  when  the  wise  King  Yadu
pleased the avadhüta by his service, he began to speak as follows.
santi me guravo räjan bahavo buddhy-upaçritäù
yato buddhim upädäya mukto ’öäméha tän çåëu
The avadhüta brähmaëa said: My dear King, I have received knowledge from the
many spiritual masters who are present in this world. It is because of this that I am able
to freely wander about in this world. Now, please hear as I describe these spiritual masters
to you.
COMMENTARY
O King, I have many spiritual masters who I chose with the help of my intelligence.
Although I did not formally receive instructions from them, I have accumulated much
knowledge  by  observing  them  with  the  help  of  my  intelligence.  In  this  way,  I  have
become free from the miseries of material existence and am wandering about freely in
this world. Now, let me tell you the names of these spiritual masters.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
PURPORT
Those who are averse to Kåñëa and who are full of anarthas are always busy lording it
over material objects. They spend their days accomplishing the three objectives of life—
religiosity, economic development, and sense gratification. Their only aim is to enhance
their duration of life, as well as their glories and beauty. Because Avadhüta Mahäçaya
did not display any such behavior, King Yadu asked him the reason for his wandering
about in this way. In reply, the avadhüta said: “Rather than accepting these twenty-four
entities that are observed within this visible world as the means of my enjoyment, I have
accepted them as my instructing spiritual masters, giving up the conception of accepting
something  and  rejecting  something  else.  I  do  not  live  like  an  ordinary  human  being,
who is driven by mental speculation and thus bereft of the service of a spiritual master. I
travel in this world under the shelter of my fixed intelligence. With a desire to surpass all
anarthas and to always render loving service to the Supreme Lord, I have taken shelter
of these twenty-four spiritual masters.”
TEXTS 33–35
påthivé väyur äkäçam äpo ’gniç candramä raviù
kapoto ’ jagaraù sindhuù pataìgo madhukåd gajaù
madhu-hä hariëo ménaù piìgalä kuraro ’rbhakaù
kumäré çara-kåt sarpa ürëanäbhiù supeçakåt
ete me guravo räjan catur-viàçatir äçritäù
çikñä våttibhir eteñäm anvaçikñam ihätmanaù
O  King,  I  have  taken  shelter  of  the  following  twenty-four  things  as  my  spiritual
masters—the earth, air, sky, water, fire, moon, sun, a pigeon, a python, the sea, a moth,
a honeybee, an elephant, a honey thief, deer, fish, the prostitute Piìgalä, the kurara bird,
a child, a young girl, an arrow maker, a serpent, a spider, and a wasp. My dear King, by
studying their activities, I have learned the science of the self.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
36 Chapter 1
COMMENTARY
The  earth,  air,  sky,  water,  fire,  the  moon,  the  sun,  a  pigeon,  a  python,  the  sea,  a
moth,  a  honeybee,  an  elephant,  a  hunter  who  steals  honey,  deer,  fish,  the  prostitute
named Piìgalä, a kurara bird, a child, a young girl, an arrow maker, a serpent, a spider,
and a wasp. I have learned many things from the behavior of these twenty-four things.
yato yad anuçikñämi yathä vä nähuñätmaja
tat tathä puruña-vyäghra nibodha kathayämi te
Please listen, My dear son of Mahäräja Yayäti, a tiger among men, as I tell you what
I learned from each of these spiritual masters.
bhütair äkramyamäëo ’pi dhéro daiva-vaçänugaiù
tad vidvän na calen märgäd anvaçikñaà kñiter vratam
A sober person, even when harassed by other living beings, should understand that
his aggressors are acting helplessly under the control of providence. In this way, he should
never be distracted from progress on his path. This principle of tolerance I have learned
from the earth, which is always steady and tolerant, despite being repeatedly kicked by the
living entities who dwell on her.
COMMENTARY
The  avadhüta  had  learned  the  quality  of  tolerance  from  the  earth—this  is  being
described in this verse. Even though living entities continuously walk over the surface of
the earth, the earth always remains steady and fixed. The avadhüta learned this quality
from the earth. In the same way, an intelligent person should never give up following
his prescribed path, whether he meets with happiness or distress brought about by the
arrangement of providence.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
PURPORT
People  consider  the  earth  to  be  an  object  of  their  enjoyment,  rather  than  an
instructing spiritual master. Every person tries to distract others from the path of eternal
religion by causing various disturbances. Because of accepting the subordination of the
demigods,  who  fulfill  our  material  desires,  the  living  entities  become  envious  of  each
other. When living entities are overwhelmed with miseries caused by other living entities,
there  is  very  little  chance  for  them  to  exhibit  tolerance.  Intolerant  people  invariably
exhibit a great propensity toward material enjoyment in this world, due to lack of proper
training. Nevertheless, the nature of the earth is tolerance. One can become tolerant if
he considers the earth as a spiritual master and takes this lesson from her.
çaçvat parärtha-sarvehaù parärthaikänta-sambhavaù
sädhuù çikñeta bhü-bhåtto naga-çiñyaù parätmatäm
An intelligent person should learn from the mountain how to devote himself to the
service of others, making their welfare the sole purpose for his existence. This is also the
lesson to be learned as a disciple of the tree.
COMMENTARY
Two features of the earth are mentioned here—the mountains and the trees. What
does one learn from the mountain? The mountain sustains the earth, produces streams
that supply water, and produces various jewels. All these are meant for others’ benefit.
In  the  same  way,  all  activities  of  a  saintly  person  should  be  performed  with  the  aim
of  benefiting  others.  This  should  be  the  nature  of  the  devotees.  Similarly,  if  someone
uproots a tree and plants it somewhere else, the tree accepts it without any protest. One
learns to do good to others from the tree. Therefore, a yogi should become like a tree.
These are the teachings one should learn from the mountain and the tree.
PURPORT
The mountain is made of stone but clay is not so hard. That is why the hard mountain
can sustain the soft soil but soft soil cannot sustain the burden of the mountain. The
earth has two kinds of ingredients; the hard mountain and the soft clay. Everyone should
learn  how  to  perform  welfare  activities  for  others  from  the  mountain.  The  principal
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
38 Chapter 1
characteristic  of  a  saintly  person  is  that  he  always  desires  supreme  benefit  for  others.
Otherwise,  selfish  interest  captures  the  living  entities  and  induces  them  to  become
envious of others.
The  lesson  to  be  learned  from  the  tree,  which  grows  on  the  earth,  is  to  tolerate
disturbances  caused  by  others.  The  non-devotee  materialistic  enjoyer  considers  all
items  of  this  world  to  be  objects  of  his  enjoyment.    But,  a  devotee  considers  all  items
as his spiritual masters, and learns from them different things. This is the nature of a
devotee. Worship of Lord Hari is possible only if one becomes as tolerant as a tree, and
as  immovable  and  steady  as  a  mountain.  Otherwise,  an  intolerant  person  can  never
engage in the service of the Supreme Lord. That is why Çré Gaurasundara has instructed
everyone to be as tolerant as a tree in order to chant the holy name of Lord Hari.
präëa-våttyaiva santuñyen munir naivendriya-priyaiù
jïänaà yathä na naçyeta nävakéryeta väì-manaù
As the life air moves within the body without expecting any support from the sense
objects, a learned sage should take satisfaction in the simple maintenance of his existence,
and should not seek satisfaction through gratifying the material senses. In other words, one
should take care of his material body in a way that his cultivation of spiritual knowledge
will  not  be  disturbed,  and  his  speech  and  mind  are  not  distracted  from  his  spiritual
discipline.
COMMENTARY
Air is of two types: the life air that moves within the body, and the air of the external
world, or wind. What we have to learn from the life air is being described here. The life
air performs its duty and is simply satisfied with food and other bare necessities of life.
As the senses enjoy various sense objects , such as form, taste, and so on, the life air does
not. Similarly, thoughtful sages should remain satisfied even with just food and water,
like the life air. One should eat only as much as is required to keep the body and soul
together, so that the life air will not be disturbed. If one does not eat, his mind will not
remain active, and as a result, his knowledge will be destroyed. Therefore, one should
maintain his life properly so that his speech and mind are not disturbed. Moreover, by
eating  abominable,  dry,  and  unclean  foods,  one’s  mind  and  words  become  disturbed.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Also, by eating palatable and rich foods, one becomes lazy, has an increase in the urge
for sex, and becomes agitated in his speech and mind.
PURPORT
It is not the duty of thoughtful men to give up their tolerance and become restless in
this rarely attained human form of life. By manipulating the senses under the influence
of  one’s  mental  propensity,  one  becomes  attracted  to  imperfect,  temporary  material
objects.  When  one  thus  engages  in  material  activities  that  are  apparently  pleasing  to
his senses, then the path of his material enjoyment becomes clearly laid out. As soon
as one forgets the Supreme Lord, one desires to lord it over this material world, which
was  created  by  Maya.  As  a  result,  his  speech  and  mind  become  disturbed.  Thus,  he
becomes situated in the darkness of ignorance and considers such ignorance or partial
knowledge to be the attainment of full knowledge. This is how he falls down from the
understanding of the Supreme Lord. Therefore, by adopting the path of liberation, and
rejecting the path of sense gratification, there is no possibility of the speech and mind
becoming  covered  by  mixed  knowledge,  or  ignorance.  In  addition,  disturbance  of  the
body  and  intelligence  under  the  influence  of  pseudo  renunciation  does  not  help  in
diminishing the propensity for material enjoyment. Therefore, it is necessary to follow
the  path  of  proper  renunciation  and  engage  in  the  service  of  the  Lord,  which  is  the
ultimate goal of life.
viñayeñv äviçan yogé nänä-dharmeñu sarvataù
guëa-doña-vyapetätmä na viñajjeta väyu-vat
The self-realized soul, whose heart is free from thoughts of happiness and distress,
should always remain unattached, like the wind, despite coming in contact with material
objects, which are full of material qualities.
COMMENTARY
Now, what can be learned from the wind is being described. Even if one is exposed
to sense gratification, one should not become attached to it. One should not place too
much  importance  in  insignificant,  great,  superior,  or  inferior  material  objects.  As  the
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
40 Chapter 1
wind cannot enter a closed room, and thus does not help in the act of burning there, the
introspective sage should not be the cause of any material activity.
PURPORT
As the unsteady, restless mind engages itself in enjoying form, taste, smell, sound,
and  touch,  it  nourishes  various  material  conceptions  of  life.  That  is  why  subjects  of
thought, such as finding faults and attributing good qualities, display their mastery over
the  mind.  As  the  wind  blowing  from  various  directions  may  create  disturbances,  the
restless mind searching for varieties of material enjoyment destroys a conditioned soul’s
attempt  for  self  control.  It  is  therefore  essential  for  a  devotee  to  serve  Lord  Hari  by
means of ekäyana, with the support of fixed intelligence.
pärthiveñv iha deheñu praviñöas tad-guëäçrayaù
guëair na yujyate yogé gandhair väyur ivätma-dåk
Just  as  the  wind,  although  carrying  varieties  of  aromas,  does  not  mix  with  them,
the  self-realized  soul,  although  living  in  a  material  body  and  apparently  acting  like  an
ordinary man, is never entangled.
COMMENTARY
One  should  remain  unattached  to  bodily  activities.  This  is  the  lesson  one  should
learn from the wind. Although the wind may carry good or bad aromas, it is not affected
by  them,  or  does  not  mix  with  them.  Similarly,  even  though  a  self-realized  soul  may
live in a material body and act according to his acquired nature, he does not become
entangled. By learning from the wind, a yogi should not become attached to his body
or  bodily  activities.  He  should  always  know  that  the  spirit  soul  is  different  from  the
material body.
PURPORT
Those who are able to understand the temporary nature of the material body and
mind, as well as the fault of the conditioned soul’s aversion to the Supreme Lord, are fit
to be called self-realized yogis. Such yogis do not act due to being driven by the three
modes of material nature, nor do they become entangled in activities that are pleasing
to the body and mind. As the wind carries aromas but is not affected by any particular
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
aroma, giving up its own nature, similarly, the self-realized soul engages in the service of
the Lord while accepting the necessities of the body without attachment. In this way, he
remains free from the results of activities performed by his gross and subtle bodies.
antarhitaç ca sthira-jaìgameñu
brahmätma-bhävena samanvayena
vyäptyävyavacchedam asaìgam ätmano
munir nabhastvaà vitatasya bhävayet
An  introspective  person,  even  while  living  in  the  material  body,  should  consider
himself  to  be  an  eternal  spirit  soul.  He  should  see  how  eternal  souls  have  entered  all
varieties of life-forms, both moving and non-moving, and that they are spread all over the
universe. One should also understand that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, in His
all-pervading feature as the Paramätmä, is present, along with the eternal souls, within all
bodies. Both the individual soul and the Supreme Soul can be realized by contemplating
the sky. Although the sky extends without limit, and everything rests within the sky, it
does not mix with anything, nor is it divided.
COMMENTARY
Although the Supersoul is situated both inside and outside all objects, He remains
unattached, just like the sky. This is the lesson to be learned from the sky. In spite of
remaining within the body, the Supersoul is all-pervading. By means of his transcendental
realization, a yogi should think of the Supersoul as all-pervading, like the sky. Although
present within all moving and non-moving living entities, He remains situated in His
supreme position. Just as the all-pervading sky is present within a pot, and is also outside
the pot, the Supersoul, although present within the material bodies of all living entities,
is all-pervading.
PURPORT
There  is  always  difference  between  the  constitutional  characteristics  of  an  object
and  its  unconstitutional  characteristics.  Persons  who  are  acquainted  with  the  science
of the self never support the argument that the material body is the self. A self-realized
soul  never  engages  in  accepting  or  rejecting  material  objects.  He  has  no  intention  of
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
42 Chapter 1
either  expanding  his  material  enjoyment  or  minimizing  it.  Because  the  living  entities
are simultaneously one with and different from the Lord, they also possess the quality
of all-pervasiveness. Similarly, if the concept of acintya-bhedäbheda is accepted, it can
be  understood  that  the  living  entities  simultaneously  possess  both  the  possibility  for
aversion to the Supreme Lord, and eternal service to the Supreme Lord. By directly or
indirectly attaining knowledge of the self, one also realizes his self to be separate from
the material objects he sees, just like the sky, which is present both inside and outside
a pot. The natural characteristics of an object are realized by observing its interaction
with other objects, both directly and indirectly.
tejo-’b-anna-mayair bhävairmeghädyair väyuneritaiù
na spåçyate nabhas tadvatkäla-såñöair guëaiù pumän
Although powerful winds blow clouds across the sky, the sky itself is never disturbed.
In  the  same  way,  the  spirit  soul  is  not  transformed  by  contact  with  material  nature.
Although the spirit soul is awarded a body made of earth, water, and fire, and although his
actions are dictated by the three modes of material nature, which are products of eternal
time, his eternal nature is never affected.
COMMENTARY
Just  as  the  sky  remains  aloof  despite  the  presence  of  clouds  being  driven  by  the
mighty wind, the spirit soul is always aloof from the material body made of fire, water,
earth, and so on, which was created by the material time.
PURPORT
As clouds hover throughout the sky, being driven by the wind, the sky does not mix
with  the  clouds,  even  though  they  appear  so.  Similarly,  although  the  gross  and  subtle
bodies  seem  merged  with  the  spirit  soul,  the  spirit  soul  is  always  distinct  from  them.
When the spirit soul comes in contact with material nature, he is awarded a body made
of  the  five  gross  elements.  When  the  spirit  soul  is  liberated  from  the  bondage  of  the
three modes of material nature, he has no more connection with the gross and subtle
bodies. Eternal time factor is the original cause of the three modes of material nature.
A differentiation in the three material qualities is made possible when the time factor
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
becomes divided into past, present, and future. The conditional state produced by the
material modes of nature, which are born of the divided time factor, is always distinct
from the eternal spirit soul. Although clouds may appear to be part of the sky, the sky is
distinct from the clouds, always maintaining its separate identity. Similarly, even though
the spirit soul appears to be temporarily confined within the gross and subtle bodies, it
is unaffected by them, just like the sky.
svacchaù prakåtitaù snigdho mädhuryas tértha-bhür nåëäm
muniù punäty apäà mitram ékñopasparça-kértanaiù
O King, a saintly person is naturally pure, free from all contaminations, well behaved,
and a benefactor of all human beings. Just by seeing, touching, or hearing such an exalted
soul, one is purified just as one is cleansed by bathing with pure water. A saintly person,
like  a  holy  place  of  pilgrimage,  purifies  all  those  who  meet  him,  because  he  is  always
engaged in chanting the glories of the Lord.
COMMENTARY
Now the lesson to be learned from water is being described. Water is by nature pure
and cooling. It is considered to be affectionate toward everyone. Water is sweet. Saintly
persons are also sweet by nature and they purify all living entities by instructing them
about  devotional  service.  Saintly  persons  should  behave  as  the  well-wishing  friend  of
everyone, just like water. Devotees purify everyone, just as water purifies everything by
its contact.
PURPORT
The people of this material world, who always desire happiness and yet simply suffer
from distress, are very restless and so, they cannot be thoughtful. They are incessantly
driven by their material conceptions of life and are firmly situated in the principle that
material  enjoyment  is  everything.  Because  they  are  exceedingly  attached  to  material
enjoyment, when their desires are not satisfied, they become angry. When they are in
anxiety due to a lack of material enjoyment, they become afflicted with fear. However,
the sages who are inclined to the Lord’s service are not like this. They are as sanctified
as  water,  they  are  naturally  affectionate  to  everyone,  and  they  are  compassionate  to
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
44 Chapter 1
all  living  entities.  They  are  true  friends  of  all  living  entities,  they  always  speak  very
sweetly,  and  they  are  never  interested  in  dry  arguments.  They  are  themselves  places
of  pilgrimage  because  they  are  fully  surrendered  to  the  Supreme  Lord,  and  thus  they
possess  the  twenty-six  transcendental  qualities.  Such  great  souls  are  in  direct  contact
with  the  Lord  and  thus,  are  never  bereft  of  His  association.  Such  saintly  souls  purify
the entire world by their constant glorification of the Lord. Simply by their association,
their faithful followers become liberated from their condition of material absorption.
By  the  phrase  apäà  mitram,  the  thoughtful  sages  have  been  compared  with
water.  Within  the  water  of  the  thoughtful  sages,  the  three  puruña  incarnations—
Käraëärëavaçäyé Viñëu, Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, and Kñirodakaçäyé Viñëu are manifest.
There is no question of contamination in transparent water. By constant hearing and
glorification of the Supreme Lord, liberated sages remain freed from material conceptions
and  thus  become  qualified  to  touch  the  Supreme  Lord.  Their  association  is  the  cause
of  the  conditioned  souls’  liberation  from  their  restlessness  of  mind  and  the  resultant
conditional life.
tejasvé tapasä dépto durdharñodara-bhäjanaù
sarva-bhakñyo ’pi yuktätmä nädatte malam agni-vat
Saintly persons have become powerful by the execution of austerities. They do not
endeavor to enjoy anything material of this world, and they accept food offered to them
by destiny. If by chance they eat some contaminated food, they are not affected, just like
fire, which burns up all contaminated substances that are offered to it.
COMMENTARY
The lesson to be learned from fire is herein being described. The next three verses
are also concerning fire. Fire is very powerful and no one has the ability to counteract
it. Fire digests the food that enters the stomach. Those who are fire-like-yogis should not
accumulate eatables for the future, but should be satisfied with what is easily available.
PURPORT
The  lessons  to  be  learned  from  fire  are  being  described  in  this  verse,  and  the
following three verses. In this verse, it is said that when fire burns everything, it remains
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa Instructs Uddhava
unaffected. Fire doesn’t become contaminated, rather, it purifies everything. Similarly,
saintly persons, even though given the opportunity to enjoy material objects, do not do
so  but  instead,  remain  unattached.  They  are  always  transcendentally  situated  and  so
they  do  not  take  pleasure  in  temporary  material  objects.  This  is  the  characteristic  of
self-realized souls. Such persons do not accumulate things unnecessarily—they accept
things only to the extent as is necessary for their maintenance and that also, without
attachment. Saintly persons are always free from the contamination of sinful activities
and thus they are the true moralists. They are not attracted to anything of this visible
world, being driven by insatiable greed. These are the qualities to be learned from fire.
kvacic channaù kvacit spañöa upäsyaù çreya icchatäm
bhuìkte sarvatra dätåëäà dahan präg-uttaräçubham
A pure devotee, just like fire, is sometimes not visible and at other times, he is seen.
For the benefit of the conditioned souls who are desperately searching for happiness, a
pure devotee may act as a spiritual master and thus like fire, burn his disciples’ sinful
reactions to ashes by mercifully accepting their service.
PURPORT
Devotees do not like to disclose their own glories and so they are like fire covered
by  ashes.  Sometimes,  in  order  to  teach  people,  devotees  reveal  their  glories,  just  like
a  blazing  fire.  Sometimes  they  act  as  a  spiritual  master  for  the  benefit  of  ordinary
people.  As  fire  accepts  gifts,  such  as  ghee,  offered  by  worshipers,  devotees  accept  the
glorification offered by their worshipers. In this way, they burn to ashes, just like fire, the
most  coveted  objects  possessed  by  materially  absorbed  worshipers,  without  exhibiting
the slightest desire to enjoy them.
praviñöa éyate tat-tat- svarüpo ‘gnir ivaidhasi
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
46 Chapter 1
The all-pervading Supersoul, having entered the bodies of the different species of life,
which are created by His own energy, appears to have assumed such identities, just as fire
appears to be manifest differently in pieces of wood of different sizes and shapes.
COMMENTARY
As fire is present within wood and manifests when there is friction, the Supreme
Lord is present everywhere within this world and He reveals Himself when one cultivates
devotional service, beginning with hearing and chanting.
PURPORT
Just as fire is present within the wood and generally manifests  when there is friction,
similarly,  the  object  of  worship  remains  with  the  worshiper  as  He  displays  various
worldly  forms.  Because  the  living  entities  are  by  nature  subordinate  to  the  Supreme
Lord, their perfection is attained when they take complete shelter of the object of their
worship. Because the conditioned souls in this material world accept service from others
rather than rendering service to their worshipable Lord, they forget their constitutional
position as eternal servants of the Supreme Lord.
Although the conditioned souls, who are averse to the Lord’s service, and who are
situated  within  the  temporary  nature  created  by  the  supreme  director,  causing  their
constitutional  positions  to  be  covered  and  their  service  to  the  Lord  forgotten,  they
remain fully spiritual.
visargädyäù çmaçänäntä bhävä dehasya nätmanaù
kalänäm iva candrasya kälenävyakta-vartmanä
The  stages  of  one’s  bodily  condition,  beginning  with  birth  and  ending  with  death,
have no effect upon the eternal soul, just like our vision of the waxing and waning of
the moon does not affect the moon itself. Such changes occur due to the imperceptible
movements of time.
COMMENTARY
Birth and death, as well as the other transformations, are meant only for the material
body and not the spirit soul, just as the apparent waxing and waning of the moon does
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
not affect the moon itself. Such changes are enforced by the imperceptible movements
of time.
PURPORT
The  wheel  of  time  is  unseen.  In  the  present  conditional  state,  the  living  entities
cannot understand what undivided, or eternal, time is. It is the time factor that causes
the waxing and waning of the moon. From this example, it is understood that the pure
spirit  soul  neither  increases  nor  decreases.  Rather,  it  is  the  material  body,  which  is
obtained from the temporary material nature, that develops and then dwindles. Under
the influence of time, the material body is born, remains for some time, and then dies.
As the waxing and waning of the moon is an effect of reflecting the rays of the sun, so
all living entities are manifested in various species by the will of the Supreme Lord.
kälena hy ogha-vegena bhütänäà prabhaväpyayau
nityäv api na dåçyete ätmano ‘gner yathärciñäm
The flames of a fire appear and disappear at every moment but this is not noticed by
the casual observer. Similarly, the waves of time flow without stop, like the currents of a
mighty river, and they imperceptibly cause the birth and death of the countless bodies of
the living entities. And yet, the soul, who is thus forced to change his position again and
again, cannot perceive how time is working.
COMMENTARY
Just  like  the  logic  of  siàha  avalokana,  this  verse  is  teaching  us  the  lesson  to  be
learned from fire. As sparks continuously appear from a blazing fire, and then disappear,
the material bodies of the spirit souls are constantly appearing and disappearing.
PURPORT
The birth and death of the living entities is caused by powerful time. Although fire
sometimes appears blazing and sometimes appears meek, the spirit soul is not affected by
the varying conditions of the material body.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
48 Chapter 1
guëair guëän upädatte yathä-kälaà vimuïcati
na teñu yujyate yogé gobhir gä iva go-patiù
Just as the sun evaporates a large quantity of water and then sends it back to the earth
in the form of rain, so a saintly devotee accepts whatever is offered to him, and when a
suitable person approaches him to beg for something, he gives such things up. Thus, both
by accepting and renouncing the objects of the senses, a devotee is not entangled.
COMMENTARY
This  verse,  and  the  next  verse,  describe  the  lesson  to  be  learned  from  the  sun.
The sun evaporates water and then distributes it, in the form of rain. In the same way,
self-realized  souls  accept  sense  objects  by  means  of  their  senses.  Later  on,  if  someone
approaches them and asks for those objects, they give them away. The self-realized souls
are not attached to anything. They do not think in terms of “I have gotten something,”
or “I have donated something.”
PURPORT
Just as the sun evaporates water by its powerful rays, saintly persons accept all kinds
of material enjoyment, but without attachment. Just as the sun does not take away the
water from the earth, but ultimately gives it back, in the form of rain, the devotees of
the Supreme Lord accept material enjoyment, but they do not become polluted by such
actions.
budhyate sve na bhedena vyakti-stha iva tad-gataù
lakñyate sthüla-matibhir ätmä cävasthito ‘rka-vat
Even though it is reflected in various objects, the sun is never divided, nor does it
have anything to do with its reflection. Only dull-headed persons would consider the sun
in this way. Similarly, although the soul is reflected through innumerable material bodies,
it remains undivided and nonmaterial.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa Instructs Uddhava
COMMENTARY
The sun may be reflected off various surfaces and thus appear in a variety of ways,
but we know that the sun itself is far beyond such manifestations and has nothing to do
with them. In the same way, the spirit souls are reflected through their material bodies,
which exhibit myriad designations, such as white, black, male, female, young, and old.
The  soul’s  eternal  constitutional  position  is  something  far  beyond  these  temporary
manifestations, however, and has nothing to do with them.
PURPORT
When the sun is reflected in many mirrors, it gives one the impression that there
are  many  suns.  Similarly,  the  illusory  energy,  Maya,  creates  the  impression  that  the
conditioned souls have no resolute desire to serve the Supreme Lord. All living entities
are eternal servants of the Supreme Lord. They have no other duty or destination than
service  to  the  Supreme  Lord.  But,  foolish  people  give  up  the  service  of  the  Supreme
Lord, under the control of false ego, and become busy for their own sense gratification.
This  is  their  foolishness.  When  the  living  entities  are  liberated  from  all  gross  and
subtle  designations,  they  constantly  engage  in  the  service  of  the  Lord  of  Vaikuëöha.
In Vaikuëöha, the living entities have no propensity whatsoever for sense gratification,
unlike the conditioned souls. There is no question of any disturbance to the exchanges
of happiness between the worshipable Lord and His eternal servants.
näti-snehaù prasaìgo vä kartavyaù kväpi kenacit
kurvan vindeta santäpaà kapota iva déna-dhéù
One should never indulge in too much attachment for anything, or concern for anyone.
Otherwise, this will lead one to great unhappiness, like the foolish pigeon.
COMMENTARY
The lesson to be learned from the pigeon is indicated in this verse. One should never
have too much affection for anyone, nor should one become too attached to anything,
nor should one be overly attached to maintaining his dependents.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
50 Chapter 1
PURPORT
Every  living  entity  is  an  eternal  servant  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  If  he  gives  up  the
service of the Lord and engages in the service of anyone else, for his own enjoyment,
he will ultimately have to suffer like the pigeon who will be described in the following
verses.
kapotaù kaçcanäraëye kåta-néòo vanaspatau
kapotyä bhäryayä särdham uväsa katicit samäù
There  once  was  a  pigeon  that  lived  in  the  forest,  along  with  his  wife.  He  built  a
suitable nest within a tree and lived there for several years in her association.
"¸Ìº ll7Hll
kapotau sneha-guëita hådayau gåha-dharmiëau
dåñöià dåñöyäìgam aìgena buddhià buddhyä babandhatuù
The two pigeons conscientiously performed their household duties. Their hearts were
tied together by the rope of affection, and they were each attracted by each other’s glances,
bodily features, and moods. Thus, they completely bound each other with the tight knots
of affection.
PURPORT
As a wife and husband are naturally attached to each other, the male and female
pigeon  were  extremely  attached  to  each  other  and  in  that  way,  they  enjoyed  sense
gratification. They were so attached to each other that they could not bear separation
from  each  other  for  even  a  moment.  The  main  cause  of  such  mundane  affection  and
attachment is forgetfulness of the Supreme Lord. The living entities’ affection for the
Lord  and  their  attachment  to  Him  is  eternal.  When  that  relationship  is  disrupted,
such pure affection and attachment is reflected in a perverted manner as affection for
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
temporary objects of this material world. This creates a reflection of happiness, in the
form of forgetfulness of the Supreme Lord.
çayyäsanäöana-sthäna värtä-kréòäçanädikam
mithuné-bhüya viçrabdhau ceratur vana-räjiñu
Innocently  placing  their  faith  in  the  future,  the  pigeons  rested,  sat,  walked,  stood,
conversed, played, ate, and so on, as a loving couple in the trees of the forest.
COMMENTARY
As  soon  as  the  conditioned  soul  forgets  the  Supreme  Lord,  he  begins  to  act  in
a  different  way  and  because  of  his  enjoying  propensity,  he  engages  in  activities  such
as  sleeping,  sitting,  traveling,  gossiping,  playing,  eating,  simply  for  his  personal  sense
gratification.  However,  these  same  activities  are  engaged  in  by  the  liberated  servants
of  the  Lord,  for  His  pleasure.  Liberated  devotees  have  no  other  business  than  serving
the  Supreme  Lord.  All  their  activities,  such  as  sleeping,  traveling,  and  speaking,  are
performed  with  the  aim  of  satisfying  the  Supreme  Lord.  The  fallen  condition  of  the
living entities is due to their making a distinction between themselves and the Supreme
Lord, who is eternal, full of knowledge and bliss.
yaà yaà väïchati sä räjan tarpayanty anukampitä
taà taà samanayat kämaà kåcchreëäpy ajitendriyaù
O King, whenever the she-pigeon desired something, she would flatteringly cajole her
husband with affectionate glances and conversation, and the he-pigeon, whose senses were
not controlled, would provide everything she wanted, even with great personal difficulty.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
52 Chapter 1
COMMENTARY
O  King,  the  wife  of  the  pigeon  pleased  her  husband  with  sweet  gestures,  smiles,
glances, and pleasant conversation.
PURPORT
Materialistic persons who, instead of accepting the Supreme Lord as the only master
of their senses, think themselves to be equal to Håñékeça, engage in various activities in
this world with a desire to gratify their senses and accumulate wealth. As the enjoyer
pigeon  acts  whimsically  to  please  the  enjoyed  pigeon,  materialists  are  busy  enjoying
temporary material happiness with their gross and subtle bodies. The example of the male
and female pigeons’ happiness and distress has been cited to teach such materialists. The
condition souls who maintain too much affection and attachment for material objects
suffer in material existence, just like the male and female pigeon.
kapoté prathamaà garbhaà gåhëanté käla ägate
aëòäni suñuve néòe sta-patyuù sannidhau sate
In due course of time, baby pigeons having tender limbs and small feathers created by
the inconceivable energy of Lord Hari were born from their eggs.
teñu käle vyajäyanta racitävayavä hareù
çaktibhir durvibhävyäbhiù komaläìga-tanüruhäù
When the time was ripe, baby pigeons, with tender limbs and feathers created by the
inconceivable potencies of Çré Hari, were born from those eggs.
COMMENTARY
The she-pigeon gave birth in due course of time.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
PURPORT
When the conditioned souls become averse to the Supreme Lord, then the Supreme
Lord spreads the network of illusion in all their activities, to increase their aversion to
His  service.  Those  who  do  not  display  an  inclination  for  the  service  of  the  Supreme
Lord are awarded suitable mentalities, according to their desires and activities. In this
way, they pose themselves as enjoyers and become busy in trying to enjoy this material
world.
prajäù pupuñatuù prétau dampaté putra-vatsalau
çåëvantau küjitaà täsäà nirvåtau kala-bhäñitaiù
The  two  pigeons  became  very  affectionate  to  their  children,  and  they  took  great
pleasure in listening to their awkward chirping, which sounded very sweet to them. Thus,
with love and affection, they began to raise the little birds who were born of them.
PURPORT
The  conditioned  souls,  who  are  averse  to  the  service  of  Kåñëa,  experience  great
pleasure  by  hearing  the  sweet  words  of  their  children,  which  are  the  fruit  of  their
aversion to the service of the Lord. But, because that pleasure is not eternal, that very
pleasure will one day become the cause of their distress.
täsäà patatraiù su-sparçaiù küjitair mugdha-ceñöitaiù
pratyudgamair adénänäà pitarau mudam äpatuù
The  mother  and  father  pigeons  became  very  happy  while  watching  their  children
grow up. Their chirping, their childish movements around the nest, and their attempts
to fly were all very pleasing to see. Seeing how their children were satisfied, the parents
felt pleased.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
54 Chapter 1
COMMENTARY
The word adéna in this verse means that the pigeons were very joyful.
snehänubaddha-hådayäv anyonyaà viñëu-mäyayä
vimohitau déna-dhiyau çiçün pupuñatuù prajäù
In  this  way,  being  bewildered  by  the  illusory  energy  of  Lord  Viñëu,  the  male  and
female pigeons, who were very much attached to each other, continued to nourish their
offspring, even though this sometimes involved a great deal of difficulty.
COMMENTARY
Being  overwhelmed  by  the  illusory  energy  of  Lord  Viñëu,  the  male  and  female
pigeons carefully maintained their young children.
ekadä jagmatus täsäm annärthaà tau kuöumbinau
paritaù känane tasminn arthinau ceratuç ciram
One day, the male and female pigeons, who had many dependent offspring, went out
of their nest to find food for their children and thus wandered about within the forest for
a long time.
dåñövä tän lubdhakaù kaçcid yadåcchäto vane-caraù
jagåhe jälam ätatya carataù svälayäntike
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Then one day, a hunter who was wandering in the forest happened to see the baby
pigeons  walking  near  their  nest.  By  spreading  his  net,  the  hunter  gleefully  captured
them.
COMMENTARY
Upon seeing that the young pigeons were playing near their nest, the hunter spread
his net and caught them all.
kapotaç ca kapoté ca prajä-poñe sadotsukau
gatau poñaëam ädäya sva-néòam upajagmatuù
The mother and father pigeon had always been very anxious to look after their helpless
children,  and  they  were  wandering  in  the  forest  looking  for  food  at  that  time.  Having
obtained something for their children to eat, they returned to their nest.
COMMENTARY
After collecting some food, the male and female pigeons returned to their nest.
kapoté svätmajän vékñya bälakän jäla-samvåtän
tän abhyadhävat kroçanté kroçato bhåça-duùkhitä
When the female pigeon saw that her children were trapped within the hunter’s net,
she  became  overwhelmed  with  anguish.  While  crying  out,  she  rushed  toward  them  as
they cried out to her in return.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
56 Chapter 1
säsakåt sneha-guëitä déna-cittäja-mäyayä
svayaà cäbadhyata çicä baddhän paçyanty apasmåtiù
The female pigeon had wanted to be bound by the strong ropes of maternal affection
and so when she saw the condition of her children, she became aggrieved. Being under the
influence of the illusory energy of the Lord, she became practically mad. As she rushed
to help her children, she also became bound up by the hunter’s net.
COMMENTARY
When the mother pigeon saw her children trapped within the net, she became so
overwhelmed with lamentation that she was also captured by the hunter.
kapotaù svätmajän baddhän ätmano ‘py adhikän priyän
bhäryäà cätma-samäà déno vilaläpäti-duùkhitaù
When the father pigeon saw his children, who he considered to be more dear than his
very life, along with his wife, who he considered as equal to himself, fatally bound within
the hunter’s net, he became terribly distressed and began to lament most pathetically.
COMMENTARY
The usage of the word ca in this verse indicates that he began to lament for both
his wife and children.
aho me paçyatäpäyam alpa-puëyasya durmateù
atåptasyäkåtärthasya gåhas trai-vargiko hataù
The male pigeon said: Alas, my life has been destroyed! What a fool I was, for never
performed any pious activities. I neglected my own self-interest and thus failed to fulfill
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
the  purpose  of  life.  My  family,  which  was  the  basis  of  my  acts  of  religiosity,  economic
development, and sense gratification, is now vanquished.
anurüpänukülä ca yasya me pati-devatä
çünye gåhe mäà santyajya putraiù svar yäti sädhubhiù
My  wife  and  I  were  a  loving  couple.  She  faithfully  served  me  as  if  I  were  her
worshipable deity. Now, she has left me alone and gone to reside in the heavenly planets
with our children.
so ‘haà çünye gåhe déno måta-däro måta-prajaù
jijéviñe kim arthaà vä vidhuro duùkha-jévitaù
I am a wretched person living alone in misery. My wife and children are dead. Why
should  I  continue  to  live?  My  heart  is  so  aggrieved  on  account  of  separation  from  my
family that my life is nothing more than suffering.
täàs tathaivävåtän çigbhir måtyu-grastän viceñöataù
svayaà ca kåpaëaù çikñu paçyann apy abudho ‘patat
As the foolish pigeon gazed upon his poor children trapped in the net, on the verge
of death, struggling hopelessly to free themselves, he lost all good sense and also fell into
the hunter’s net.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
58 Chapter 1
COMMENTARY
Even after seeing that his children were entrapped within the net and were vainly
struggling to get free, the male pigeon also fell into the trap.
taà labdhvä lubdhakaù krüraù kapotaà gåha-medhinam
kapotakän kapotéà ca siddhärthaù prayayau gåham
After the cruel and greedy hunter had captured the attached male and female pigeons,
and their children, he happily returned home.
evaà kuöumby açäntätmä dvandvärämaù patatri-vat
puñëan kuöumbaà kåpaëaù sänubandho ‘vasédati
One who is too attached to family life becomes overburdened with grief and anxiety.
Like the pigeon, his only hope is to find some tiny pleasure in sexual affairs. While busily
engaged in maintaining his family, a materialistic person must suffer greatly, along with
all his family members.
yaù präpya mänuñaà lokaà mukti-dväram apävåtam
gåheñu khaga-vat saktas tam ärüòha-cyutaà viduù
If a person who, even after attaining the human form of life, which is like the gateway
to liberation, becomes attached to household life, like the foolish bird in this story, then
he is considered by the learned persons as one who has climbed to a high place only to
trip and fall down.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
PURPORT
Human beings are more qualified to achieve eternal benefit than the living entities
in other forms of life. Living entities, such as animals and birds, are less-intelligent. It is
easily seen by human beings that they are unable to give up attachment for their wife and
children. In the same way, human beings who do not understand the consequences of a
miserable materialistic life become attached to enjoying the association of their fellow
humans  and  thus  are  just  like  the  pigeon  family.  As  long  as  human  beings  are  alive,
they should try to learn these lessons from the above-mentioned eight spiritual masters
and thus attain life’s ultimate goal. To see the earth, air, sky, water, fire, the moon, the
sun, and the pigeon with mere knowledge of the external world will only increase one’s
thirst for sense gratification. But, with sharp internal vision, if one considers them as
worshipable  rather  than  objects  of  his  enjoyment,  then  his  inclination  toward  Kåñëa
will increase, and he will become eligible to attain liberation, even while living in this
world.
Thus  ends  the  translation  of  the  first  chapter  of  the  Uddhava-géta,  entitled  “Lord
Kåñëa instructs Uddhava” with the commentaries of Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura
and purports of Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 2
the story of PIngaLa
CHAPTER SUMMARY
In  this  chapter,  the  Supreme  Lord,  Çré  Kåñëa,  describes  to  Uddhava  what  the
avadhüta brähmaëa had learned from nine spiritual masters, beginning with the python.
The avadhüta brähmaëa narrated to Mahäräja Yadu his experiences as follows.
1.  The lesson to be learned from the python: It is the duty of intelligent persons to
remain engaged in the worship of the Supreme Lord while maintaining their livelihood
with whatever is easily available by the arrangement of providence. Even if no food is
available, one who desires to worship the Supreme Lord should think that whatever is
destined  to  him  will  certainly  come,  and  that  he  should  not  waste  his  precious  time
uselessly endeavoring for the bodily necessities. In this way, he should maintain himself
like a python, who does not endeavor for food. This practice will enable him to meditate
on the Supreme Lord with undivided attention.
2.  The lesson to be learned from the ocean: Self-realized souls, who are inclined
towards  the  Supreme  Lord,  appear  very  pure  and  grave,  just  like  the  water  of  a  calm
ocean.  As  the  ocean  does  not  increase  during  the  rainy  season,  even  as  many  rivers
flow  into  it,  nor  does  it  dry  up  in  summer,  when  no  water  from  the  rivers  enter  it,  a
self-realized soul is neither elated when he receives objects of enjoyment, nor distressed
when such objects are lacking.
3.  The lesson to be learned from the moth: Just as a moth is enticed by a fire, flies
into the fire, and dies, foolish people whose senses are not controlled are attracted by
the form of a woman, her golden ornaments, and her dress, and thus fall down to the
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
62 Chapter 2
darkest regions of hell. Chasing after these embodiments of the divine illusory energy of
the Lord, one ultimately loses his life and falls down into the most horrible hell.
4.  The  lesson  to  be  learned  from  the  bee:  There  are  two  kinds  of  bees—the
bumblebee and the honeybee. The lesson to be learned from the bumblebee is that a self-
realized soul should maintain himself by begging a little bit from door to door. He should
collect essential truths from all the scriptures, whether they be great or insignificant.
The  lesson  to  be  learned  from  the  honeybee  is  that  a  renounced  person  should  not
accumulate food, thinking that he will eat it later, in the evening or the next day. If he
does so, he will be destroyed along with his accumulated food, just as a greedy honeybee
is destroyed along with its honey.
5.  The lesson to be learned from an elephant: The male elephant follows the female
elephant with a desire to enjoy her, and thus falls into a ditch made by a hunter and is
trapped. In the same way, one who is attached to the form of a woman is destroyed by
falling deep into the well of material existence.
6.  The lesson to be learned from the honey thief: Just as a man takes all the honey
that  was  collected  with  hard  labor  by  the  honeybees,  one  in  the  renounced  order  of
life has the privilege of enjoying before anyone else the food and other valuable things
purchased by the hard-earned money of householders.
7.  The lesson to be learned from the deer : Just as a deer loses his life after being
attracted by the music of a hunter, the life of a person who is attached to worldly songs
is wasted.
8.  The lesson to be learned from the fish: Just as a fish meets with death when it
tries to enjoy the baited fishhook, unintelligent people spoil their valuable human lives
by being slaves to the demands of the insatiable tongue.
9.  There  was  once  a  prostitute  named  Piìgala  who  lived  in  the  city  of  Videha
and  from  her,  the  avadhüta  learned  a  lesson.  One  day,  Piìgala  dressed  herself  nicely
and  waited  impatiently,  from  evening  to  midnight,  for  the  arrival  of  her  paramour.
When he didn’t come, Piìgala became so disappointed that she developed detachment.
Being  inspired  by  her  conscience,  she  abandoned  her  sinful  desire  born  of  the  thirst
for meeting her paramour. She then meditated on Çré Hari and attained great peace in
her mind. The instruction received from her is that desire for material enjoyment is the
cause of our distress. Therefore, only one who has given up such desires can fix himself
in meditation upon the Supreme Lord, and thus achieve transcendental peace.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
çré-brähmaëa uväca
sukham aindriyakaà räjan svarge naraka eva ca
dehinäà yad yathä duùkhaà tasmän neccheta tad-budhaù
The  avadhüta brähmaëa  said:  O  King,  just  as  material  miseries  come  upon  the
living  entities,  whether  in  heaven  or  in  hell,  without  endeavor,  material  happiness  will
automatically come without seeking it. For this reason, intelligent persons never endeavor
for material enjoyment.
COMMENTARY
This chapter describes nine spiritual masters, beginning with the python. Later on,
the  disappointment  that  the  prostitute,  Piìgala,  experienced  will  be  described  as  the
cause of her happiness. One should not work very hard simply for bodily maintenance.
In this regard, what can be learned from the python will be described in the following
four verses. Just as distress comes without any endeavor, happiness will come to us of its
own accord and so, what is the need to endeavor for it?
PURPORT
Intoxicated by material enjoyment, the conditioned souls try to gratify their senses
by  contact  with  temporary  material  objects.  This  enjoyment  is  of  two  types—worldly
and heavenly. The conditioned souls enjoy sense gratification as long as they are alive,
and  then  after  death,  according  to  their  karma,  pious  souls  enjoy  heavenly  pleasure
while impious souls suffer in hellish conditions. Rather than pursue the path of fruitive
activities  for  attaining  the  heavenly  planets,  or  becoming  sense  enjoyers  in  contact
with temporary material objects, intelligent people should become inclined towards the
service of Kämadeva Viñëu, who is the director and aim of our senses.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
64 Chapter 2
gräsaà su-måñöaà virasaà mahäntaà stokam eva vä
yadåcchayaiväpatitaà grased äjagaro ‘kriyaù
Like  the  python,  one  should  give  up  material  endeavors  and  accept  for  one’s
maintenance food that comes of its own accord, whether such food is delicious or tasteless,
ample or meager.
COMMENTARY
The  propensity  of  the  python  is  to  be  inactive  and  make  no  endeavor  for  his
maintenance.
PURPORT
The python is satisfied with whatever comes of its own accord. Instead of endeavoring
for sense enjoyment, it remains satisfied with any condition of life. It does not try to eat
palatable  food,  or  too  much  food,  and  it  does  not  try  to  manipulate  the  senses,  mind,
and  speech  for  attaining  happiness.  Instead,  the  python  always  displays  its  gravity.
The lesson to be learned from the python is that those who are inclining towards the
service of Lord Kåñëa should not be anxious to gratify their senses. They should not be
bound up by the urges of the belly and genitals. One should remain indifferent to such
propensities. Eating too much, collecting too much, and endeavoring too much are not
favorable for the service of the Supreme Lord. Rather than seeing the python as a mere
snake,  one  should  consider  it  to  be  a  spiritual  master.  Indeed,  one  who  can  see  how
the Supreme Lord is present everywhere must be considered a mahä-bhägavata. Only
those who are fully surrendered to the Supreme Lord are actually sober, and qualified
to  serve  the  Supreme  Lord.  They  are  like  the  python,  who  is  never  agitated  for  sense
enjoyment.
çayétähäni bhüréëi nirähäro ‘nupakramaù
yadi nopanayed gräso mahähir iva diñöa-bhuk
If food does not come of its own accord, a saintly person should simply fast without
making  any  endeavor  to  fill  his  stomach.  He  should  understand  that  his  fasting  is  the
arrangement of the Supreme Lord. Thus following the example of the python, he should
patiently wait for the Lord to supply him food.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
ojaù-saho-bala-yutaà bibhrad deham akarmakam
çayäno véta-nidraç ca nehetendriyavän api
A saintly person should remain in a peaceful condition of life by giving up all anxiety
with regards to the maintenance of his body. Even though he may be very sound, both
mentally and physically, he should never attempt to accumulate wealth like a materialistic
man, but should always remain fixed in his real self-interest.
PURPORT
One  should  give  up  lethargy  and  always  remain  awake  to  his  real  self-interest  by
engaging  in  the  devotional  service  to  the  Supreme  Lord.  One  should  not  waste  time
accumulating more and more material assets. In this way, one should follow the example
of the python.
muniù prasanna-gambhéro durvigähyo duratyayaù
ananta-päro hy akñobhyaù stimitoda ivärëavaù
A saintly sage is happy and pleasing in his external behavior, whereas internally he is
most grave and thoughtful. Because he is unfathomable, unconquerable, and unlimited,
he  is  never  disturbed,  and  thus  in  all  respects  he  is  like  the  tranquil  waters  of  the
unfathomable and unsurpassable ocean.
COMMENTARY
This and the next verse describe the lesson to be learned from the ocean. A self-
realized soul is as grave as the ocean because he does not allow anyone to understand
his intentions. A saintly person is thus unfathomable and does not reveal his mentality
to  others.  He  is  unconquerable  because  his  prowess  is  difficult  to  overcome.  He  is
insurmountable  because,  even  when  put  into  great  difficulty,  he  does  not  waver  from
his  determination  to  remain  in  Kåñëa  consciousness.  He  does  not  reveal  his  mind  to
others, and others do not agitate him because he has conquered the urges of the mind
and senses.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
66 Chapter 2
samåddha-kämo héno vä näräyaëa-paro muniù
notsarpeta na çuñyeta saridbhir iva sägaraù
During the rainy season, raging rivers rush toward the ocean, and during the summer,
the same rivers contain hardly any water. Still, the ocean does not increase in size during
the  rainy  season,  nor  does  it  dries  up  in  the  summer.  Similarly,  a  saintly  person  who
has accepted the Supreme Lord as his goal of life should not become overjoyed when he
receives material opulence, nor become morose when he has nothing.
COMMENTARY
Even though during the rainy reason the swollen rivers rush into the ocean, it does
not  become  swollen.  In  the  summer,  the  ocean  does  not  dry  up  due  to  lack  of  water
from the rivers, which have become shallow. Similarly, the transcendentalist should not
become joyful when in a materially prosperous condition, and should not lament when
he  finds  himself  impoverished.  Actually,  the  devotees  of  Lord  Hari,  who  are  fixed  in
devotional service, feel the sweetness of that service and lament when they feel a  lack
of devotional service.
PURPORT
The mind of the devotee who is always absorbed in devotional service is unfathomable,
like the water of the ocean. Just as the ocean is very deep and therefore insurmountable,
foolish conditioned souls are unable to understand the grave heart of a liberated soul.
Those who are wise and are therefore inclined toward the Lord’s service, and who desire
their own welfare, should become as grave as the ocean by minimizing material activities.
They should not become disturbed and restless like ordinary foolish people. Although
the water of innumerable rivers constantly fills the ocean, it remains unchanged, just as
devotees of the Supreme Lord, who are liberated souls, never are disturbed, even in the
midst of a calamity.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
dåñövä striyaà deva-mäyäà tad-bhävair ajitendriyaù
pralobhitaù pataty andhe tamasy agnau pataìga-vat
Those whose senses are not controlled feel attracted to enjoy the form of a woman,
which is created by the illusory energy of the Lord. Thus they fall into the darkness of
material existence, just as the moth maddened by the fire rushes blindly into its flames.
COMMENTARY
When material beauty, especially the form of a woman, attracts a living entity, he
becomes captivated. This is what is to be learned from the moth.
yoñid-dhiraëyäbharaëämbarädi-dravyeñu mäyä-raciteñu müòhaù
pralobhitätmä hy upabhoga-buddhyä pataìga-van naçyati nañöa-dåñöiù
Foolish people are immediately aroused at the sight of a lusty woman who is beautifully
decorated with golden ornaments, fine clothing, and other cosmetic features. Being eager
to enjoy her, such foolish people lose all intelligence and are destroyed, just like the moth
who rushes into the blazing fire.
COMMENTARY
Although  a  woman  is  attractive  for  all  five  senses,  the  perception  of  her  form  is
mentioned first because of its prominence.
PURPORT
The  conditioned  souls,  who  are  averse  to  the  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  are  so
attached  to  sense  gratification  that  they  always  remain  in  the  association  of  women,
engaged  in  their  service.  Such  persons  are  controlled  by  their  wives,  their  fine  dress,
and their cosmetic arrangements, and they cannot understand that these are like a trap
meant  for  their  destruction.  Foolish  people  who  are  driven  by  the  desire  to  enjoy  the
objects of the senses, which are created by the illusory energy of Lord Viñëu, consider
themselves to be enjoyers, just like moths attracted by a blazing fire. They endeavor to
remain entangled in the material world because they think that it is a place of enjoyment.
These restless and uncontrolled conditioned souls are attracted by the glaring form of
material beauty and madly run towards it, just as a moth rushes towards a blazing fire.
67 67
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
68 Chapter 2
As  a  result,  they  fall  into  the  darkness  of  ignorance  and  lose  all  chance  for  spiritual
happiness. Therefore, those who have material desires and are thus engaged in fruitive
activities, and who have thus fallen into the trap of material enjoyment, should take this
lesson from the moth.
stokaà stokaà grased gräsaà deho varteta yävatä
gåhän ahiàsann ätiñöhed våttià mädhukaréà muniù
The self-realized sage should accept only enough food to keep his body and soul together,
taking just a little from different houses without giving trouble to the householders. In
this way, one should take a lesson from the honeybee.
COMMENTARY
In  this  and  the  next  verse,  the  lesson  to  be  learned  from  the  honeybee  is  being
described.  A  honeybee  may  sometimes  become  attracted  by  the  extraordinary  aroma
of a lotus flower and sit on it the whole day. However, when the lotus closes its petals
at sunset, the honeybee is trapped. Similarly, an intelligent person should not become
attracted by the generosity of a householder who gives him sumptuous food, and thus
become ensnared in materialistic life. For this reason, a saintly person should collect a
little food from many houses. By taking too much, again and again, a mendicant should
not give trouble to householders.
PURPORT
A honeybee collects a small amount of honey from many flowers. A saintly devotee
should  take  this  lesson  from  his  spiritual  master,  the  honeybee.  Instead  of  asking  for
a large quantity of alms from a particular householder, a saintly person should accept
only that which is necessary for his maintenance by taking a small amount of food from
many  householders.  Such  behavior  will  not  cause  any  difficulty  to  the  householders.
If  a  householder  is  regularly  asked  to  give  sumptuous  food,  he  may  certainly  become
displeased with the mendicant. Those who are mendicants should take this lesson of the
honeybee. To accumulate vast assets for undertaking welfare activities is an impediment
on the path of Kåñëa consciousness.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
aëubhyaç ca mahadbhyaç  caçästrebhyaù kuçalo naraù
sarvataù säram ädadyät puñpebhya iva ñaöpadaù
Just as a bee takes the nectar from all kinds of flowers, similarly, an intelligent person
should take the essence of all the scriptures.
COMMENTARY
One should follow the example of the honeybee, accepting only the essence of life. An
intelligent person should be prepared to take lessons from all religious scriptures, whether
they be big or small, just as a honeybee collects honey from all kinds of flowers.
PURPORT
The symptom of an expert person is that he is able to extract the essence from both
the small and large sources of knowledge. To collect the essence of the flowers is the act
of  an  intelligent  person,  and  not  the  taking  away  of  the  entire  plant  or  bush.  This  is
the lesson to be learned from the honeybee. An ass carries heavy loads but is ultimately
cheated,  whereas  the  honeybee,  rather  than  carry  the  burden  of  a  garden  of  flowers,
simply collects the essential nectar from the flowers. By carefully noting the difference
between  the  ass  and  the  honeybee,  an  intelligent  person  should  extract  the  essence
from  all  scriptures  that  are  favorable  for  the  cultivation  of  devotional  service.  One
should not be like an ass, carrying a heavy burden of useless knowledge. It is often seen
that people deceive themselves by discussing useless topics, such as Çré Gaurasundara’s
disappearance, and His traveling to Dvärakä.
säyantanaà çvastanaà vä na saìgåhëéta bhikñitam
päëi-pätrodarämatro makñikeva na saìgrahé
An introspective sage should not accumulate the food that he has collected by begging,
thinking, “I will eat this in the evening, and I will save this for tomorrow.” Rather, he
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
70 Chapter 2
should  accept  only  as  much  food  as  fits  in  his  hands  and  store  only  that  which  fills
his belly. He should not imitate a greedy honeybee who eagerly collects more and more
honey.
COMMENTARY
The  lesson  to  be  learned  from  the  honeybee  is  being  described.  A  saintly  person
should not accumulate the food that he has collected by begging, thinking, “I will eat
this in the evening, and I will eat that tomorrow.” Then, what is the question of saving
something for the next month? It is the opinion of some that one should not accept an
invitation to eat at some future time. What kind of begging bowl should one employ?
The answer is that one should use the palms of one’s hands as his begging bowl. Where
should one store his alms? The answer is that one should store whatever he collects in his
stomach, and nowhere else. One who follows this advice is certainly a saintly devotee.
PURPORT
As  a  honeybee  may  meet  with  death  after  being  stuck  in  the  huge  quantity  of
honey it has collected with great attachment, a mendicant may spoil his spiritual life by
accumulating more than is required. However, for spreading Kåñëa consciousness, one
may accumulate unlimited material opulence.
säyantanaà çvastanaà vä na saìgåhëéta bhikñukaù
makñikä iva saìgåhëan saha tena vinaçyati
A  saintly  mendicant  should  not  save  any  food  for  eating  later  in  the  day,  or  the
next day. If he disregards this injunction and, like the honeybee, collects more than his
immediate needs, he will be destroyed, along with his accumulated wealth.
COMMENTARY
What is the harm if one accumulates a great deal of wealth? The answer is that if a
mendicant accumulates more than necessary, he will meet with destruction, along with
his possessions.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
padäpi yuvatéà bhikñur na spåçed däravém api
spåçan karéva badhyeta kariëyä aìga-saìgataù
The  introspective  sage  should  never  touch  a  young  woman,  or  even  a  wooden  doll
in the shape of a woman with his feet. By bodily contact with a woman, he will become
entangled and fall down into the pit of material enjoyment, just as an elephant is captured
by the use of a she-elephant, due to his desire to touch her body.
COMMENTARY
A saintly person should not touch even a wooden form of a woman with his feet.
Elephant  hunters  tempt  and  attract  a  male  elephant  by  leading  it  to  a  pit  covered  by
grass, showing it a female elephant at the far side. The enamored elephant then falls into
the pit, and is thus captured.
PURPORT
The trick used for capturing wild elephants is herein described. Wild elephants are
tempted by exhibiting a she-elephant in front of them. They are led to a well-guarded pit
and thus captured. The madness of the elephant is compared to the arrow of Cupid. The
maddened  elephants  are  attached  to  enjoying  the  association  of  female  elephants  but
intelligent devotees should adopt a mood contrary to this. As an elephant is attracted
by the touch of a female elephant, a lusty man is attached to enjoying the association
of  women.  Therefore,  to  see  a  woman  on  some  pretext,  or  to  even  think  about  her,
is  totally  prohibited  for  those  who  are  renounced.  One  should  not  allow  his  mind  to
be lost in lusty dreams of sex pleasure. Sexual enjoyment is exhibited in various ways,
such as by talking, by contemplating, by touching, and ultimately, by engaging in sexual
intercourse. All of these constitute a network of illusion by which one is helplessly bound
to material existence. Therefore, an intelligent person should not indulge in any form of
sense enjoyment with women.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
72 Chapter 2
nädhigacchet striyaà präjïaù karhicin måtyum ätmanaù
balädhikaiù sa hanyeta gajair anyair gajo yathä
An intelligent person should never try to exploit the form of a woman for his sense
gratification.  Just  as  an  elephant  trying  to  enjoy  a  she-elephant  may  be  killed  by  other
bull elephants also enjoying her company, one trying to enjoy a lady’s company can at any
moment be killed by her other lovers who are stronger than he.
COMMENTARY
One should not think, “This woman is meant only for my enjoyment,” because he
may be killed by a stronger debauchee who wants to enjoy the same woman.
na deyaà nopabhogyaà ca lubdhair yad duùkha-saïcitam
bhuìkte tad api tac cänyo madhu-hevärthavin madhu
Greedy  people  earn  wealth  with  great  labor.  But  the  person  who  has  struggled  so
much to acquire this wealth is not always allowed to enjoy it himself or give it in charity
to others. A greedy person is like a bee who works hard to make some honey, which is
then stolen by someone who will either eat it or sell it. No matter how carefully one tries
to protect his hard-earned wealth, there will always be someone who is able to steal it.
COMMENTARY
One may not be able to enjoy his hard-earned wealth, or give it in charity to others,
because  there  is  always  the  chance  of  it  being  stolen.  This  is  the  lesson  that  can  be
learned from the honey thief. Greedy people often earn money with great hardship but
then are unable to enjoy it or give it away in charity because someone else has stolen
it, just as a honey thief enjoys the honey that was accumulated by honeybees. Now, the
question may arise, “How could another person know about one’s hidden wealth?” The
answer is that thieves can understand who has wealth by observing their behavior, just
as a honey thief knows the whereabouts of honey by carefully observing the movement
of the honeybees.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
PURPORT
The conditioned souls, who are averse to the service of the Supreme Lord, fall into
a life of inauspiciousness by accumulating material possessions for their own enjoyment.
A honeybee works hard to collect honey, and yet it is enjoyed by someone else, and so an
intelligent person should not allow himself to suffer the same fate. This is another lesson
to be learned from the honeybee.
su-duùkhopärjitair vittair äçäsänäà gåhäçiñaù
madhu-hevägrato bhuìkte yatir vai gåha-medhinäm
Just as a hunter takes away the honey laboriously produced by the honeybees, similarly
the  renounced  mendicants  first  eat  the  food  cooked  by  the  attached  householders  who
earn their wealth with great labor.
COMMENTARY
It is possible to enjoy sense gratification without personal endeavor. In this regard,
I  accept  the  honey  thief  as  my  spiritual  master.  The  brahmacärés  and  the  sannyäsés
are entitled to be the first to enjoy the sumptuous food produced by householders. If a
householder enjoys such food without first offering it in charity to the mendicants, he
must purify himself by undergoing the atonement called cändräyaëam.
PURPORT
Honeybees collect honey with a great deal of hardship. Just as a greedy hunter takes
away the honey that was accumulated by the honeybees, renounced persons accept the
first portion of the wealth accumulated by greedy and attached householders as alms.
Although  externally,  it  appears  that  saintly  persons  use  the  householders’  wealth  for
their personal gratification, they actually employ it in the service of the Supreme Lord.
grämya-gétaà na çåëuyäd yatir vana-caraù kvacit
çikñeta hariëäd baddhän mågayor géta-mohität
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
74 Chapter 2
A sannyaséwho lives in the forest should never hear worldly songs promoting sense
enjoyment. The consequence of becoming attached to worldly music can be understood by
studying the example of the deer, who are bewildered by the sweet music of the hunter,
and are thus captured and killed.
COMMENTARY
Attachment  to  mundane  songs  and  music  is  an  anartha.  This  should  be  learned
from the deer. The vänaprasthas and the sannyäsés should never hear mundane songs
and music, which simply promote sense gratification. Instead, they should hear songs in
glorification of the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
Just  as  a  deer  becomes  captivated  by  the  hunter’s  enchanting  music,  sannyäsés
will certainly fall down from the path of renunciation by listening to songs promoting
sense gratification. This is the lesson to be learned from the deer. It is well-known how
Åñyaçåìga Muni became ensnared by hearing the singing of beautiful women.
nåtya-väditra-gétäni juñan grämyäëi yoñitäm
äsäà kréòanako vaçya åñyaçåìgo mågé-sutaù
Being  attracted  by  the  mundane  singing,  dancing  and  musical  performances  of
beautiful women, even the great sage Åñyaçåìga, the son of Mågé, came under their sway,
just like a pet dog.
COMMENTARY
The  most  instructive  example  of  a  renounced  person  being  attracted  by  songs  of
sense gratification is Åñyaçåìga Muni, who came under the control of beautiful women
in that way.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
jihvayäti-pramäthinyä jano rasa-vimohitaù
måtyum åcchaty asad-buddhir ménas tu baòiçair yathä
Just as a fish, incited by the desire to enjoy its tongue, loses its life, being pierced by
the fisherman’s hook, foolish people meet with ruin, being disturbed by the urges of the
uncontrollable tongue.
COMMENTARY
Attachment for enjoying varieties of taste is another anartha. This is the lesson to
be learned from the fish. The fisherman places some meaty bait on a hook that easily
attracts the unintelligent fish. Being greedy to enjoy its tongue, the fish tastes the bait
and thus dies.
PURPORT
The  fish  invites  its  death  by  being  attracted  to  the  meat  attached  to  the  hook  of
the fisherman. Taking a lesson from the fish, the introspective sages should not indulge
in eating palatable food, consisting of six kinds of taste. One cannot properly worship
Kåñëa  if  one  remains  a  servant  of  his  tongue  and  genital.  In  this  regard,  one  should
carefully consider the following verses.
jihvära lälase yei iti-uti dhäya
çiçnodara-paräyaëa kåñëa nähi päya
One  who  is  subservient  to  the  tongue  and  who  thus  goes  here  and  there,
devoted to the genitals and the belly, cannot attain Kåñëa.
(Çré Caitanya-caritämåta Antya 6.227)
çamo man-niñöhatä buddher dama indriya-saàyamaù
titikñä duùkha-sammarño jihvopastha-jayo dhåtiù
The word çama or çänta-rasa indicates that one is attached to the lotus feet
of Kåñëa. Dama means controlling the senses and not being deviated from the
Lord’s service. Endurance of unhappiness is titikñä and dhåti means controlling
the tongue and the genitals. (Çrémad-bhägavatam 11.19.36)
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
76 Chapter 2
indriyäëi jayanty äçu nirähärä manéñiëaù
varjayitvä tu rasanaà tan nirannasya vardhate
Intelligent people control all their senses, except the tongue, by fasting, because fasting
causes one to be even more afflicted by the desire to taste delicious food.
PURPORT
Those  who  are  attached  to  material  enjoyment  fulfill  their  desire  for  taste  with
the help of the tongue. If the tongue is denied its favorite tastes, it becomes greedy and
agitated. An intelligent person, however, does not fall under the control of the tongue
but instead tries to make progress in spiritual life.
The business of the tongue is to seek gratification with varieties of tastes. By visiting
the  twelve  forests  of  Våndävana,  however,  one  can  become  released  from  the  desire
to  enjoy  the  twelve  kinds  of  mundane  sense  gratification.  The  five  primary  material
relationships are neutrality, servitude, friendship, parental love, and conjugal love. The
seven secondary material relationships are humor, astonishment, chivalry, compassion,
anger,  dread,  and  ghastliness.  In  their  pure  form,  these  twelve  rasas  are  exchanged
between the living entity and the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the spiritual sky.
By visiting the twelve forests of Våndävana, one can purify these twelve rasas, which are
not manifested in a perverted form. In this way, one can become a liberated soul who no
longer possesses material desires. If one artificially tries to renounce sense gratification,
he will certainly fail. Indeed, such artificial renunciation generally results in inflaming
one’s material desires.
tävaj jitendriyo na syäd vijitänyendriyaù pumän
na jayed rasanaà yävaj jitaà sarvaà jite rase
Even  if  a  person  controls  all  his  other  senses,  if  he  fails  to  control  his  tongue,  he
cannot be called a genuinely self-controlled man. On the other hand, if a person controls
his tongue, it is to be understood that he has conquered all his senses.
COMMENTARY
The deer, elephant, moth, honeybee, and fish are attracted by sound, touch, form,
taste, and smell and thus invite destruction. Human beings are also attracted to these
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
five objects of the senses. If one becomes attached to sense objects, one’s degradation is
inevitable. The tongue, which is the leader of all the other senses and which induces the
other senses, is potentially the most harmful. Therefore, one should take special care to
conquer the tongue. The purport is that if one fasts, his other senses can be regulated
but his tongue’s demands will further increase. And, by indulging the tongue in sense
gratification,  all  the  other  senses  will  become  agitated.  Therefore,  one  should  control
his tongue in such a way that all the other senses, which are subordinate to the tongue,
are also controlled. What is the method of conquering the tongue? One should loudly
chant the holy name of the Supreme Lord and thus experience the ecstasy of kértana. By
honoring the remnants of the Supreme Lord’s food, one can also control his tongue.
PURPORT
The senses of those in the bodily conception of life can never be controlled because
such persons are bereft of the mellows of devotional service. Those with uncontrolled
senses try to enjoy the objects of the senses, which are distinct from the spiritual realm
of Vraja, and so they end up becoming devoted to their belly and genitals. Therefore,
until one comes to the platform where he can see everything in relation to the Supreme
Lord,  he  should  utilize  everything  in  his  possession  for  the  service  of  Kåñëa,  without
attachment.  Only  in  this  way  can  one  conquer  his  material  desires,  which  are  very
difficult  to  subdue.  A  devotee  who  in  the  beginning  is  unable  to  traverse  the  path  of
attachment (räga-märga) must follow the regulative principles. One’s desires for material
enjoyment will not cease until they are replaced by desires to serve the Supreme Lord.
When  a  devotee  attains  the  platform  of  bhäva,  on  the  strength  of  his  regulative
devotional  service,  then  as  a  result  of  becoming  free  of  all  anarthas,  he  becomes  a
traveler on the path of attachment. It is only then that one becomes liberated from the
gross urges of the tongue, belly, and genitals, as well as from the subtle urges for profit,
fame, and adoration. At that time, he is no longer bewildered by the flowery words of
the Vedas, which tempt one to remain in this temporary world of material enjoyment.
When one can control the urges of his body, mind, and speech, then all his anarthas are
eliminated. In this regard, Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura has written the following song,
the meaning of which should be discussed by everyone.
çaréra avidyä jäla,   jaòendriya tähe käla,
jéve phele viñaya-sägare
tä’ra madhye jihvä ati,   lobhamäyä sudurmati,
tä’ke jetä kaöhina saàsäre
kåñëa baòa dayämaya,   karibäre jihvä jaya,
sva-prasäda-anna dila bhäi
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
78 Chapter 2
sei annämåta khäo,   rädhä-kåñëa-guëa gäo,
preme òäka caitanya-nitäi
O  Lord!  This  material  body  is  a  lump  of  ignorance,  and  the  senses  are  a
network  of  paths  leading  to  death.  Somehow  or  other,  we  have  fallen  into  the
ocean of material sense enjoyment, and of all the senses, the tongue is the most
voracious  and  uncontrollable.  It  is  very  difficult  to  conquer  the  tongue  in  this
world,  but  You,  dear  Kåñëa,  are  very  kind  to  us  for  You  have  sent  this  nice
prasäda to help us conquer the tongue. Therefore, let us take this prasäda to our
full satisfaction and glorify Your Lordships Çré Çré Rädhä and Kåñëa and in love
call for the help of Lord Caitanya and Prabhu Nityänanda.
piìgalä näma veçyäséd videha-nagare purä
tasyä me çikñitaà kiïcin nibodha nåpa-nandana
O son of kings, long ago, there lived a prostitute named Piìgalä who resided in the
city of Videha. Now, please hear what I have learned from her.
COMMENTARY
Now, the brähmaëa will describe what he learned from Piìgalä, the prostitute,
by narrating her story.
sä svairiëy ekadä käntaà saìketa upaneñyaté
abhüt käle bahir dväre bibhraté rüpam uttamam
One night, the prostitute dressed herself attractively and sat outside her house, waiting
for the arrival of a lover.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
COMMENTARY
By  dressing  in  attractive  ways  and  making  various  sensual  bodily  gestures,  the
prostitute, Piìgala, would attract her lovers.
märga ägacchato vékñya puruñän puruñarñabha
tän çulka-dän vittavataù käntän mene ‘rtha-kämuké
O foremost of men, this prostitute wanted desperately to get some money and for that
purpose she stood by the side of the road at night, gazing at all the men  as they passed
by. She thought, “This man looks wealthy and I am sure that he would like to enjoy with
me.” In this way, she evaluated all men as they passed her by.
COMMENTARY
People who were attached to enjoying an intimate relationship with a woman would
come to her house and pay a handsome amount.
TEXTS  25-26
ägateñv apayäteñu sä saìketopajéviné
apy anyo vittavän ko ‘pi mäm upaiñyati bhüri-daù
evaà duräçayä dhvasta- nidrä dväry avalambaté
nirgacchanté praviçaté niçéthaà samapadyata
As Piìgalä stood in her doorway, many men passed her by. Her only means of support
was her profession as a prostitute, and so she anxiously thought, “Maybe this man will
enjoy my company. He looks like he has a lot of money. Here is another man who will
surely  pay  me  for  my  love.  Alas!  This  man  did  not  stop  but  someone  else  is  coming
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
80 Chapter 2
now who will surely want to pay me for my love.” Thus, hoping against hope, Piìgalä
remained standing in her doorway, unable to earn enough money and thus retire for the
night. Being very anxious, she sometimes went out into the street, and then again went
back into her house. In this way, the night passed.
COMMENTARY
The word niçéthaà indicates that she waited till midnight but no one availed of her
services.
asyä vittäçayä çuñyad- vakträyä déna-cetasaù
nirvedaù paramo jajïe cintä-hetuù sukhävahaù
When  it  became  very  late,  the  prostitute,  who  badly  wanted  to  get  some  money,
became  morose  so  that  her  face  appeared  withered.  Being  full  of  anxiety  and  greatly
disappointed, she began to experience a sense of detachment from her situation, so that a
kind of happiness arose within her mind.
COMMENTARY
Her entire night passed by thinking about wealth.
PURPORT
The prostitute, Piìgalä, who was greedy for money, dedicated her life to satisfying
lusty  men.  As  a  result  of  engaging  in  the  service  of  conditioned  souls  with  her  body,
mind,  and  speech,  and  forgetting  the  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  her  mind  became
extremely restless. Finally, she became so frustrated that she became indifferent to her
situation, so that happiness began to arise within her mind.
tasyä nirviëëa-cittäyä gétaà çåëu yathä mama
nirveda äçä-päçänäà puruñasya yathä hy asiù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Detachment is the only means by which a person can destroy the network of material
desires. The prostitute felt disgusted with her situation and this gave rise to indifference.
Now, please hear from me the song sung by the prostitute in that situation.
COMMENTARY
Piìgalä thought, “My ambitions are the cause of my material bondage. Detachment
or  indifference  is  the  only  weapon  by  which  this  network  of  bondage  can  be  cut  to
pieces.”
PURPORT
Those  who  cannot  gain  freedom  from  the  bondage  of  their  social  position  and
family responsibilities, if they take up the trident of detachment, they can cut the knots
of material bondage and attain auspiciousness. Those who are too attached to material
enjoyment and are addicted to bodily pleasures cannot understand the messages of the
self-satisfied Supreme Lord, being bound by the ropes of illusion.
na hy aìgäjäta-nirvedo deha-bandhaà jihäsati
yathä vijïäna-rahito manujo mamatäà nåpa
O King, just as an ignorant person with no spiritual knowledge is never inclined to
renounce his false sense of ownership, similarly, a person who has not developed a sense
of detachment will never give up his attachment for his material body.
COMMENTARY
The avadhüta begins to explain the purpose of this narration.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
82 Chapter 2
piìgalä uväca
aho me moha-vitatià paçyatävijitätmanaù
yä käntäd asataù kämaà kämaye yena bäliçä
Piìgalä said: Alas! Just see how greatly illusioned I am, due to my uncontrolled senses.
As a result, I have lost my power of discrimination and therefore desire satisfaction from
similarly illusioned lusty men.
COMMENTARY
The word käma means “lusty desires.” Piìgalä is in effect saying, “I desire to become
satisfied in sex and thus I can understand that I am completely illusioned.”
PURPORT
The senses of the conditioned souls are naturally attracted to the sense objects of
this  material  world.  This  is  the  prime  example  of  the  conditioned  soul’s  foolishness.
Some people, who are actually averse to the Lord’s service, try to artificially check their
senses  from  engagement  in  sense  gratification  for  some  time,  but  this  actually  does
more harm than good because of their misunderstanding regarding the Absolute Truth.
Foolish  people  consider  other  sense  enjoyers  to  be  their  masters,  and  thus  they  pray
to  them  for  the  fulfillment  of  their  own  sense  gratification.  However,  as  soon  as  one
becomes enlightened in spiritual understanding, his life of material enjoyment can be
transformed into a life of spiritual perfection.
antaà samépe ramaëaà rati-pradaà vitta-pradaà nityam imaà vihäya
akäma-daà duùkha-bhayädhi-çoka- moha-pradaà tuccham ahaà bhaje ‘jïä
I am so foolish that I have given up the service of the most beloved person, the Supreme
Lord, who is always situated within my heart, and who can award me real pleasure and
prosperity. I abandoned His service and engaged in the service of insignificant men who
were unable to fulfill my real desires but instead brought me distress, fearfulness, anxiety,
lamentation, and illusion.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
COMMENTARY
Piìgalä thought, “The Supersoul is sitting in my heart. Why do I not try to experience
the  pleasure  of  conjugal  love  with  Him?  Why  am  I  earning  money  by  allowing  many
sinful men to enjoy my body? Actually, all these rich men were unable to fulfill my lusty
desires.”
PURPORT
The  material  desires  of  the  conditioned  souls  are  aroused  due  to  lack  of  God
consciousness, or due to lack of seeing the Supreme Lord as the only worshipable person.
Aversion to the Lord’s service places the conditioned souls in an artificial condition of
distress, fear, lamentation, and illusion. Being under the control of the material nature,
they  cannot  understand  that  the  Supreme  Lord  is  the  true  object  of  worship  in  all
respects,  and  that  He  is  always  present  by  their  side.  The  Supreme  Lord  is  the  actual
enjoyer of all that is enjoyable, and He is situated in the hearts of all living entities as
their well-wishing friend. Because it is the natural propensity for a conditioned soul to
befriend  another  conditioned  soul,  they  should  together  engage  in  the  service  of  the
non-dual Supreme Person. The Supreme Lord is eternal, and He is the master of those
who  award  material  wealth  and  other  benedictions.  He  alone  awards  transcendental
happiness because He is the one supreme person, who is eternal, full of knowledge and
bliss, who maintains all other, subordinate persons. One who gives up his relationship
with the Supreme Lord and indulges in temporary material enjoyment is certainly fool
number one.
aho mayätmä paritäpito våthä säìketya-våttyäti-vigarhya-värtayä
straiëän naräd yärtha-tåño ‘nuçocyät krétena vittaà ratim ätmanecchaté
Alas! I have unnecessarily troubled myself by adopting this most abominable profession
of prostitution, desiring to earn money and enjoy sexual pleasure by selling my body to
lusty men, who themselves are to be pitied.
COMMENTARY
Piìgalä laments that she tried to attain a most insignificant pleasure by selling her
body to insignificant, useless men.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
84 Chapter 2
PURPORT
The art of arousing the spirit of enjoyment is called saìketya våtti, and it involves
employing sensual gestures and movements. Employing this art is one of the sinful ways
of earning one’s livelihood. Only the most condemned and greedy sense enjoyers are so
attracted by the illusory beauty of a woman that they will spend their hard-earned money
in exchange for a few moments of her association. If, somehow or other, a conditioned
soul revives his inclination for Kåñëa’s service, he will come to understand that it was
because of giving up the service of the Lord that he has been swallowed by the witches
of material enjoyment and impersonal liberation.
yad asthibhir nirmita-vaàça-vaàsya-sthüëaà tvacä roma-nakhaiù pinaddham
kñaran-nava-dväram agäram etad vië-mütra-pürëaà mad upaiti känyä
This material body is like a house wherein, I, the  eternal spirit soul, am residing.
My spine, ribs, and the bones of my arms and legs are like the beams and pillars of the
house. This body, which is full of stool and urine, is covered by skin, hair, and nails. Foul
secretions emanate from the nine doors of this body. Other than me, what woman would
foolishly devote herself to this material body, thinking that she will find pleasure there?
COMMENTARY
Piìgalä thought, “Alas! This is most strange! I have accepted this disgusting body,
which is full of obnoxious substances, as the object of my conjugal pleasure. This house
in the form of my body has nine gates.  The spinal chord is the main bamboo pillar upon
which the body is supported. The bones of the rib cage, as well as the hands and legs, are
considered to be secondary beams, giving support. Who is more unfortunate than me to
consider such a body as a source of love and pleasure?”
PURPORT
The  gross  body  of  the  conditioned  soul  is  compared  to  a  house.  Just  as  a  house
consists of many wooden beams that provide support to the structure, the physical body
is an assembly of bones, flesh, hair, nails, and other component parts. This body excretes
abominable  substances,  such  as  stool,  urine,  and  perspiration.  Therefore,  it  must  be
concluded that those who give up the service of Kåñëa just to accept the perishable and
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
disgusting  objects  of  this  material  world  as  desirable,  are  certainly  most  unfortunate
people.
videhänäà pure hy asminn aham ekaiva müòha-dhéù
yänyam icchanty asaty asmäd ätma-dät kämam acyutät
I  rejected  Çré  Hari,  who  awards  self-realization  and  our  original  spiritual  form,  to
enjoy sense gratification with many men. There is certainly no other woman in this city
of Videha who is as foolish as myself.
COMMENTARY
Piìgalä  thought,  “I  am  so  unchaste  that  I  desired  the  association  of  many  useless
men rather than Lord Acyuta, who gives Himself to His dear devotees.”
PURPORT
The  Supreme  Lord  is  the  personification  of  all  transcendental  mellows.  There  is
nothing temporary or abominable in Him. If one desires to serve the Lord, one should
give up the aspiration to be the enjoyer of the objects of the senses. To serve the temporary
objects of this material world is certainly foolishness.
suhåt preñöhatamo nätha ätmä cäyaà çarériëäm
taà vikréyätmanaivähaà rame ‘nena yathä ramä
Lord Hari is the well-wisher, the Lord, and the Supersoul of all living entities. I will
purchase Him with the price of complete surrender and then enjoy with Him, just like
Lakñmédevé.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
86 Chapter 2
COMMENTARY
Piìgalä thought, “ ‘What should I do then?’ If you ask me this, my answer is that I
will dedicate my body to my most beloved Lord and enjoy His company.”
PURPORT
Self-realized souls who are devoted to Lord Hari’s service are the actual friends and
best masters of the embodied souls. If the conditioned souls engage in the service of the
Lord, like Lakñmé, then their lives will become successful and they will attain eternal
happiness.  Piìgalä realized that it is better to serve the Supreme Lord with ones body,
mind, and speech, under the subordination of Lakñmédevé, than to sell one’s body to the
temporary men of this world. This realization alone can free the conditioned soul from
his propensity for material enjoyment.
kiyat priyaà te vyabhajan kämä ye käma-dä naräù
ädy-antavanto bhäryäyä devä vä käla-vidrutäù
Men give women some satisfaction of their senses, but they are all destined to die,
even  the  demigods  in  the  heavenly  planets.  These  men  are  temporary  creations  of  the
illusory energy of the Lord, who will be forcibly dragged away by time. Considering this,
how much pleasure can men actually give to their women?
COMMENTARY
Piìgalä thought, “All men, and even demigods, who endeavor to fulfill their lusty
desires, are subject to birth and death. So, how can they please their wives? I therefore
conclude  that  no  one  in  this  world,  or  in  the  next,  other  than  the  Supreme  Lord,  is
worthty of my service.”
PURPORT
Tempting  objects  of  this  world,  proud  men  who  are  busily  absorbed  in  their
temporary material identifications, and demigods who cannot award any true benefit to
their subordinates, are destroyed by time as a result of their karma.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
nünaà me bhagavän préto viñëuù kenäpi karmaëä
nirvedo ‘yaà duräçäyä yan me jätaù sukhävahaù
Although I was determined to enjoy this material world, because this most auspicious
detachment has awakened in my heart, I think that Lord Çré Hari must be pleased with
me. Without even knowing it, I must have performed some activity that satisfied Him.
COMMENTARY
In  this  way  Piìgalä,  praises  her  good  fortune.  Some  learned  authorities  have  said
that when Dattätreya happened to come to Piìgalä’s house, she said to him, “O foremost
sage, what have I done to have the good fortune of seeing you? Today, you have mercifully
blessed  my  house.  Please  come  in.  Have  some  food  and  water  and  then  rest  awhile.”
Indeed, Piìgalä even cleansed her courtyard when Dattätreya arrived there, out of his
own sweet will.
PURPORT
In this regard, one should contemplate the purport of the following verse from the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.23.28):
nünaà me bhagaväàs tuñöaù sarva-deva-mayo hariù
yena néto daçäm etäà nirvedaç cätmanaù plavaù
The Supreme Lord, Hari, who is the Lord of lords, must have been pleased
with me because, by His mercy, I have developed this mood of detachment, which
is the means for my deliverance from the ocean of material existence.
maivaà syur manda-bhägyäyäù kleçä nirveda-hetavaù
yenänubandhaà nirhåtya puruñaù çamam åcchati
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
88 Chapter 2
One who has developed detachment can give up the bondage of material existence,
and one who undergoes great suffering gradually becomes, out of a sense of hopelessness,
indifferent toward the material world. It was due to my great suffering that detachment
awoke  in  my  heart.  If  I  were  actually  unfortunate,  how  could  I  have  undergone  such
merciful  suffering?  I  can  only  conclude  that  I  am  actually  fortunate  because,  I  have
received the mercy of the Lord. Somehow or other, He must be pleased with me.
COMMENTARY
Piìgalä  thought,  “Someone  may  ask  me,  ‘Why  are  you  suffering  despite  having
wealth? Is it because Lord Viñëu is not pleased with you?’ I would reply, ‘Please do not say
that. If Lord Viñëu was not pleased with me then I, who am an unfortunate prostitute,
would  not  have  developed  a  mood  of  indifference.  Because  of  this  indifference,  I  was
able to give up all material aspirations and achieve satisfaction within my heart.’ ”
tenopakåtam ädäya çirasä grämya-saìgatäù
tyaktvä duräçäù çaraëaà vrajämi tam adhéçvaram
Therefore, with all respect, I accept this favor of Çré Hari upon my head. I will now
surrender myself unto the lotus feet of the Lord of the universe, Çré Hari, giving up all
material desires.
COMMENTARY
Piìgalä thought, “Therefore, I gladly welcome this favor of Lord Viñëu, which has
resulted in my mood of detachment. Although I was fully attached to worldly enjoyment,
I now take shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord of the universe, Çré Hari.”
santuñöä çraddadhaty etad yathä-läbhena jévaté
viharämy amunaiväham ätmanä ramaëena vai
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
I have firm faith in the favor of Çré Hari, and I am satisfied to accept whatever He
provides  for  my  maintenance.  I  will  only  enjoy  the  association  of  Çré  Hari,  who  is  the
actual source of all love and happiness.
COMMENTARY
Piìgalä thought, “If someone were to ask, ‘What will you do after surrendering to
Çré Hari?’ the answer is that I will enjoy life with whatever I receive by His mercy. I will
only enjoy the association of Çré Hari, who alone is capable of giving me real pleasure.”
PURPORT
One never commits any sin or offense if he utilizes all material objects in the service
of  Lord  Kåñëa,  and  accepts  whatever  comes  of  its  own  accord  for  his  maintenance.
Desire for material enjoyment arises as soon as there is an absence of the propensity to
render loving service to the Supreme Lord. This is the root cause of all material miseries.
While utilizing this natural propensity for serving the Supreme Lord, one is able to see
everything  within  the  material  world  as  meant  for  the  Lord’s  enjoyment,  rather  than
his  own  enjoyment.  Thus  one  sees  the  material  world  as  an  opportunity  for  engaging
in the devotional service of the Lord. In Kåñëa consciousness, one’s conditional life is
dissolved, and one become qualified to establish true friendship with other devotees in
the course of rendering loving service to the Supreme Lord.
saàsära-küpe patitaà viñayair muñitekñaëam
grastaà kälähinätmänaà ko ‘nyas trätum adhéçvaraù
The  intelligence  of  the  conditioned  souls  is  taken  away  by  his  activities  of  sense
gratification. Thus, he falls into the dark well of material existence, where he is seized by
the deadly serpent of time. Who else but the Supreme Personality of Godhead could save
the poor living entity from such a hopeless condition?
COMMENTARY
One may argue, “Why did Piìgalä surrender to Viñëu, instead of one of the demigods,
like  Brahmä?”  The  answer  is  that  no  one  but  Lord  Viñëu  is  capable  of  delivering  the
living  entities  who  are  drowning  in  the  dark  well  of  material  existence,  and  are  thus
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
90 Chapter 2
blinded by their spirit of material enjoyment and devoured by the poisonous snake of
time.
PURPORT
The  conditioned  souls  are  bitten  by  the  snake  of  time  because  they  consider
themselves  to  be  the  enjoyers  of  this  temporary  material  world,  which  is  experienced
by  the  senses  as  sound,  touch,  form,  taste,  and  smell.  This  spirit  of  enjoying  separate
from  the  Lord  is  the  reason  for  their  falling  into  the  dark  well  of  material  existence.
Still, the all-merciful Supreme Lord has made many arrangements to deliver the fallen
conditioned  souls  from  the  dark  well  of  material  enjoyment  by  engaging  them  in  His
devotional service.
ätmaiva hy ätmano goptä nirvidyeta yadäkhilät
apramatta idaà paçyed grastaà kälähinä jagat
Only when one can see how this material world is being swallowed by the serpent of
time does he become sober and thus come to his senses. Thus, he refrains from all types
of material enjoyment and becomes qualified to act for his own protection.
COMMENTARY
One may ask, “By what means can one be delivered from the dark well of material
existence?”  The  answer  is  that  when  one  realizes  that  the  entire  material  creation  is
being  swallowed  by  the  serpent  of  time,  then  he  can  become  indifferent  to  all  kinds
of material enjoyment. Being endowed with this understanding, one becomes his own
protector.
Piìgalä replies, “Recently, this was my personal experience, and thus I became freed
from the clutches of material existence without separate endeavor. Now, I will worship
Lord Viñëu with love and devotion.”
This is the sum and substance of this verse.
PURPORT
When  a  conditioned  soul  becomes  self-realized  and  his  natural  propensity  for  the
Lord’s  service  is  awakened,  he  receives  the  spiritual  strength  to  protect  himself  from
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
falling back down into material existence. As a result, he is no longer anxious to enjoy
this material world, nor does he become intoxicated by thoughts of material enjoyment.
It  is  only  in  forgetfulness  of  the  Supreme  Lord  that  a  living  entity  indulges  in  sense
gratification under the influence of the time factor. Such a materialistic life is the result
of  one’s  aversion  to  the  Supreme  Lord.  One  can  be  influenced  by  the  material  time
factor,  sense  objects,  and  sense  pleasure  only  as  long  as  one  is  ignorant  of  his  eternal
constitutional position. The bodily conception of life separates the living entities from
the cultivation of Kåñëa consciousness and makes them falsely think of themselves as
the enjoyers of material nature.
çré-brähmaëa uväca
evaà vyavasita-matir duräçäà känta-tarña-jäm
chittvopaçamam ästhäya çayyäm upaviveça sä
The  Avadhüta  brähmaëa said:  Thus,  her  mind  completely  made  up,  Piìgalä  cut
off all her sinful desires to enjoy sex pleasure with so-called lovers, and so she became
situated on the platform of perfect peace. Thereafter, she sat down on her bed.
äçä hi paramaà duùkhaà nairäçyaà paramaà sukham
yathä saïchidya käntäçäà sukhaà suñväpa piìgalä
Material  desires  are  undoubtedly  the  causes  of  terrible  misery,  and  freedom  from
such desires is the cause of the greatest happiness. While thinking in this way, Piìgalä
renounced all desires to enjoy the affection of materialistic men, so that she was able to
peacefully go to sleep.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
92 Chapter 2
PURPORT
Sense  enjoyers  are  always  disturbed  in  this  world  of  so-called  enjoyment.  Hiding
somewhere  nearby  the  path  of  renunciation,  the  threefold  material  miseries  inspire
careless transcendentalists to become enjoyers of perishable material objects whenever
they  get  the  slightest  opportunity.  The  sinful  desire  for  attaining  fame  even  while
tied by the ropes of desires for material enjoyment sometimes induces the conditioned
souls to become servants of Rävaëa, Kaàsa, Jaräsandha, Agha, Baka or Pütanä. If the
conditioned souls turn off the temporary lamp of material desires and become attached
to the lotus feet of the inhabitants of Vraja, then all auspiciousness will be within their
grasp. Pseudo renunciation makes a living entity very proud. On the other hand, proper
renunciation places living entities on the platform of pure goodness, or transcendence.
Until the lamp of material desire is turned off, a devotee’s desire for the service of the
lotus feet of Çré Rädhä cannot materialize.
In this regard, one should contemplate the meaning of this verse:
äçä-bharair amåta-sindhu-mayaiù kathaïcit
kälo mayäti-gamitaù kila sämprataà hi
tvaà cet kåpäà mayi vidhäsyasi naiva kià me
präëair vrajena ca varoru bakäriëäpi
“O  ravishingly  beautiful  Çré  Rädhe!  I  am  passing  my  days  and  nights  in
torment, with the singular hope that I may obtain the ocean of immortal nectar,
so kindly shower Your grace upon me. Deprived of Your mercy, of what use are
my life, residence in Vraja, or even servitorship to Kåñëa, the enemy of Bakäsura?”
(Çréla Raghunätha däsa Gosvämé’s Viläpa-kusumäïjali 102)
Çré Gaurasundara has taught us that the mood of separation is the best process for
relishing the mellows of ecstatic love of Kåñëa.
Thus ends the translation of the second chapter of the Uddhava-géta, entitled “The
story  of  Piìgalä,”  with  the  commentaries  of  Çréla  Viçvanätha  Cakravarté  Öhäkura  and
purports of Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 3
detaChment from aLL that Is materIaL
CHAPTER SUMMARY
In this chapter, the avadhüta brähmaëa describes the lessons to be learned from the
seven remaining spiritual masters, beginning with the kurara bird. He also describes an
additional guru, one’s own body.
1. The instruction of the kurara bird is that attachment is the mother of all distress.
One who is unattached and has no material possessions is qualified to achieve unlimited
happiness.
2. The avadhüta brähmaëa learned from a foolish, lazy boy that by becoming free
from anxiety, one can nicely worship the Supreme Lord and experience transcendental
bliss.
3.  The  instruction  received  from  the  young  girl  who  kept  only  one  conchshell
bangle on each wrist is that one should remain alone and thus steady his mind. Only in
such a condition will it be possible for one to fix his mind completely on the Supreme
Lord.  Once,  several  men  arrived  to  ask  for  the  hand  of  a  young  girl,  whose  relatives
had  coincidentally  left  the  house.  She  went  inside  and  began  to  prepare  food  for  the
unexpected guests by beating rice paddy. At that time, her conchshell bangles made a
loud noise, rattling against each other. in order to stop this sound, the girl broke off the
bangles, one by one, until at last, only one remained on each arm. Just as two or more
bangles make noise, if two or more people live together, there is bound to be quarrel and
useless gossiping.
4.  The  avadhüta  brähmaëa  also  received  instruction  from  the  arrow  maker,  who
was so absorbed in constructing an arrow that he did not even notice that the king was
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
94 Chapter 3
passing  right by him on the road. In the same way, one should worship Çré Hari  with
undivided attention and a controlled mind.
5.  The  lesson  to  be  learned  from  the  serpent  is  that  a  sage  should  wander  alone,
should not live in any prearranged place, should be always careful and grave, should not
reveal his movements, should take assistance from no one, and should speak little.
6. This is the lesson to be learned from the spider. Just as a spider makes its web from
its own saliva and then withdraws it, the Supreme Lord creates this universe from out of
Himself and then winds it up into His own body.
7. From the weak insect that assumed the form of a wasp, the avadhüta brähmaëa
learned that the living entity, under the sway of affection, hatred, and fear, attains in his
next life the identity of that object upon which he had fixed his attention.
8. Realizing that the temporary material body is subject to birth and death, and that
this human form of body is extremely rarely achieved, a sober person should give up his
attachment for the body and should properly utilize his time for acquiring knowledge so
that he can attain the goal of life.
çré-brähmaëa uväca
parigraho hi duùkhäya yad yat priyatamaà nåëäm
anantaà sukham äpnoti tad vidvän yas tv akiïcanaù
The  avadhüta brähmaëa  said:  Everyone  considers  something  of  this  world  to  be
very dear to him. Because of such attachment, one ultimately becomes morose. One who
understands this simple truth should give up the false sense of possessiveness and thus
tread the path to true happiness.
COMMENTARY
This chapter describes seven spiritual masters, beginning with the kurara bird. The
material body has been added as the eighth spiritual master in this chapter. In total, the
lessons to be learned from twenty-five spiritual masters are described. The first two verses
of this chapter deal with the lesson to be learned from the kurara bird. When one enjoys
the object that is most dear to him, he will certainly face great distress later on. On the
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Detachment from all that is Material
other hand, those who remain aloof from such attachment, remaining as akiïcana, are
to be known as learned men who are qualified to achieve unlimited happiness.
PURPORT
As  a  result  of  forgetfulness  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  the  conditioned  soul’s  taste  for
objects produced by the material modes of passion and ignorance increases unlimitedly.
The conditioned souls rarely have the inclination to attain the platform of pure goodness,
from which one can realize the Supreme Lord. All material miseries are produced from
the influence of the modes of passion and ignorance. The momentary lack of distress
experienced  due  to  the  influence  of  mode  of  goodness  is  not  the  same  as  genuine,
spiritual happiness. Unalloyed devotees do not notice the presence of temporary distress
produced by the interaction of the modes of nature because they experience unlimited
happiness  due  to  being  situated  on  the  platform  of  pure  goodness.  Conditioned  souls
who are under the control of their senses run after limited, ever-changing, and tempting
material objects and thus become beggars to achieve their objectives. This is the cause
of their distress.
sämiñaà kuraraà jaghnur balino ‘nye nirämiñäù
tadämiñaà parityajya sa sukhaà samavindata
Once a large kurara bird was very hungry, being unable to find any prey, it attacked a
weaker kurara bird who had some flesh in its claws. Being in danger of his life, the weaker
kurara bird gave up his meat and thereby attained actual happiness.
COMMENTARY
The word samiñaà in this verse refers to a meat-eating kurara bird. When a kurara
bird was chased by another stronger kurara bird, it dropped the flesh in its claws and
thus achieved happiness.
PURPORT
Incited  by  the  modes  of  nature,  birds  become  violent  and  kill  other  birds,  either
to eat them or to steal meat captured by them. Hawks, vultures and eagles are in this
category.  A  human  being  should  give  up  the  envious  propensity  to  commit  violence
against  others  and  should  take  to  Kåñëa  consciousness,  whereby  one  sees  every  living
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
96 Chapter 3
entity  as  equal  to  oneself.  On  this  platform  of  actual  happiness,  one  does  not  envy
anyone, and thus sees no one as his enemy.
na me mänäpamänau sto na cintä geha-putriëäm
ätma-kréòa ätma-ratir vicaräméha bäla-vat
Those who are attached to family life are always anxious about their children, wealth,
and reputation, but I have nothing to do with all these. I do not worry about a family, and
I have no concern for praise or insult. I live the life of the eternal soul, and I experience
affection on the spiritual platform. Thus I wander over the earth like a child.
PURPORT
When one has no interest in accumulating worldly praise or criticism, he can become
fixed in the science of the self.
dväv eva cintayä muktau paramänanda äplutau
yo vimugdho jaòo bälo yo guëebhyaù paraà gataù
In  this  world,  two  types  of  people  are  free  from  all  anxiety  and  merged  in  great
happiness—one  is  the  retarded  and  childish  fool,  and  the  other  is  an  advanced
transcendentalist who knows the science of the Absolute Truth.
COMMENTARY
In this verse, the lesson to be learned from a foolish boy is described. The brähmaëa
said, “I don’t care for honor and dishonor, I am not worried about house, children, and
so on. Just like a child, I happily wander about alone in this world.”
PURPORT
The  more  one  prays  for  sensual  enjoyment  in  this  material  world,  the  more  his
desires  for  such  enjoyment  increase,  so  that  he  becomes  more  and  more  absorbed  in
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Detachment from all that is Material
matter. Those who are indifferent to material pleasures are freed from material miseries
and are happy.
kvacit kumäré tv ätmänaà våëänän gåham ägatän
svayaà tän arhayäm äsa kväpi yäteñu bandhuñu
Once, a girl of marriageable age was at home alone because her parents and relatives
were  away.  At  that  time,  some  men  came  to  ask  for  her  hand  in  marriage  and  so  she
received them with all hospitality.
COMMENTARY
The  lesson  to  be  learned  from  the  unmarried  girl  is  being  described.  Once,  some
men  went  to  the  house  of  an  unmarried  girl  to  ask  for  her  hand  in  marriage.  It  so
happened that the girl’s relatives were away from home at that time. So, the unmarried
girl received the guests nicely, offering them äsanas of kuça grass and water.
teñäm abhyavahärärthaà çälén rahasi pärthiva
avaghnantyäù prakoñöha-sthäç cakruù çaìkhäù svanaà mahat
O King, when that unmarried girl began to beat rice paddy to prepare food for the
unexpected guests, the conch shell bangles on her arms began to collide with each other
and create a loud noise.
COMMENTARY
Wondering when the people of the house would return and begin to cook, the girl
began  to  prepare  rice  to  serve  the  guests.  However,  her  conch  shell  bangles  began  to
make a loud noise.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
98 Chapter 3
sä taj jugupsitaà matvä mahaté våéòitä tataù
babhaïjaikaikaçaù çaìkhän dvau dvau päëyor açeñayat
The  young  girl  was  afraid  that  her  guests  would  know  that  her  family  was  poor
because she was performing the menial task of husking the rice. Being very intelligent,
the girl broke the conchshell bangles so that only two remained on each wrist.
ubhayor apy abhüd ghoño hy avaghnantyäù sva-çaìkhayoù
taträpy ekaà nirabhidad ekasmän näbhavad dhvaniù
Thereafter,  when  the  young  girl  resumed  husking  the  rice,  the  bangles  once  again
made noise by colliding with each other. Then, the girl took off one more bangle from
each arm, leaving only one, so that the noise completely stopped.
COMMENTARY
The girl was embarrassed because husking rice is the job of a servant in the house
of well-to-do people. The intelligent girl then took off her bangles, one by one, leaving
only  two  on  each  arm.  When  these  bangles  again  began  to  make  noise,  she  took  one
more bangle from each arm, leaving only one.
anvaçikñam imaà tasyä upadeçam arindama
lokän anucarann etän loka-tattva-vivitsayä
O  subduer  of  the  enemy,  I  travel  over  the  surface  of  the  earth  learning  about  the
nature of this world. Thus, I personally witnessed the lesson taught by this girl.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Detachment from all that is Material
COMMENTARY
The brähmaëa sage explained to King Yadu that what he was speaking was realized
knowledge. By wandering over the world, he had experienced everything that he had
learned  from  the  gurus  under  discussion.  Instead  of  pretending  to  be  an  all-knowing
mystic, he simply described what he had learned during his wanderings.
väse bahünäà kalaho bhaved värtä dvayor api
eka eva vaset tasmät kumäryä iva kaìkaëaù
When many people live together, there will undoubtedly be quarrels. Even if only two
people live together, there will certainly be frivolous conversation and disagreement. That
is why one should live alone, following the example of the young girl and her bangles.
COMMENTARY
The lesson to be learned from the girl who removed all her bangles but one is that
one who is trying to advance on the path of jïäna-yoga, which involves philosophical
speculation,  should  live  alone  after  giving  up  all  desires  for  having  the  association
of  friends  and  relatives.  After  all,  whenever  people  live  together,  they  quarrel  over
insignificant  matters,  and  engage  in  much  trivial  talk  that  has  no  relation  to  their
aspiration for spiritual advancement. Therefore, just to have a peaceful environment
in which to practice yoga, it is recommended that one live alone. On the other hand,
a princess who has been married to a qualified prince dresses herself very attractively
and then appears before him to receive his love. Similarly, Bhakti-devé decorates herself
with the association of Vaiñëavas, who assemble to chant the holy names of the Lord
and dance in ecstasy. Because pure devotees do not associate with non-devotees, in that
sense, they reside alone and thus take the lesson of the single bangle from the young
girl. After all, pure devotees do not quarrel among themselves, nor do they engage in
frivolous talks because they are fully satisfied on the platform of rendering devotional
service to the Lord, without any material desires. Thus, devotees of the Lord happily
associate with one another for the purpose of rendering service to the Lord.
The Supreme Lord has personally said in the Çrémad Bhägavatam (3.25.34):
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
100 Chapter 3
naikätmatäà me spåhayanti kecin
mat-päda-seväbhiratä mad-éhäù
ye ’nyonyato bhägavatäù prasajya
sabhäjayante mama pauruñäëi
A  pure  devotee,  who  is  attached  to  the  activities  of  devotional  service  and
who  always  engages  in  the  service  of  My  lotus  feet,  never  desires  to  become
one with Me. Such a devotee, who is unflinchingly engaged, always glorifies My
pastimes and activities.
PURPORT
If there is more than one person in a place, there is every possibility that there will
be a quarrel, because each individual has his own idea and purpose. When the girl took
away all her bangles except one on each wrist, there was no more noise as a result of
colliding with each other. Similarly, one should give up the association of those who are
not devoted to the Supreme Lord. The character of a Vaiñëava is always pure. However,
in places where non-devotees congregate, there will undoubtedly be envious criticism of
Vaiñëavas. If many people gather to glorify the Lord, there will be no conflict of interest.
That is why one should worship the Lord in the association of like-minded people. This
is also solitary bhajana as described in the system of ekäyana.
mana ekatra saàyuïjyäj jita-çväso jitäsanaù
vairägyäbhyäsa-yogena dhriyamäëam atandritaù
One should perfect his yoga sitting postures and the breathing exercises while carefully
cultivating a life of renunciation. Thus, with single-minded attention, one should engage
in yoga, making it the goal of his life.
COMMENTARY
One should practice concentrating his mind. This lesson is to be learned from the
arrow maker. The mind is always flickering, due to material attachment, wandering here
and there. Here it is recommended, to perfect a life of renunciation, one should practice
asöäìga-yoga mixed with devotional service.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Detachment from all that is Material
yasmin mano labdha-padaà yad etac  chanaiù çanair muïcati karma-reëün
sattvena våddhena rajas tamaç ca vidhüya nirväëam upaity anindhanam
The mind can be controlled when it is fixed on the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
When the mind is thus applied to the service of the Lord, it becomes free from polluted
desires for sense gratification so that as the mode of goodness increases in strength, one
can completely give up the modes of passion and ignorance. When the mind is no longer
fed the fuel of the modes of nature, the fire of material existence becomes extinguished,
so that one achieves the transcendental platform of direct relationship with the object of
his meditation, the Supreme Lord.
COMMENTARY
When the mind is controlled and restrained from the desire for performing fruitive
activities, it becomes cleansed of the contamination of passion and ignorance through
an  increase  of  the  mode  of  goodness.  When  the  mind  is  no  longer  influenced  by  the
modes of passion and ignorance, it becomes steady and as a result of being situated in
the mode of goodness, one becomes joyful.
PURPORT
The  three  modes  of  material  nature  create  conflict  among  one  another.  For  that
reason,  those  who  are  actually  intelligent  carefully  control  their  mind.  When  one  is
freed from the influence of the modes of passion and ignorance, one achieves a life of
auspiciousness. It is only possible to transcend the three modes of material nature when
the mind is fully under control.
tadaivam ätmany avaruddha-citto  na veda kiïcid bahir antaraà vä
yatheñu-käro nåpatià vrajantam  iñau gatätmä na dadarça pärçve
There  was  once  an  arrow  maker  who  was  so  absorbed  in  making  a  straight  arrow
that he did not even notice the king, when he passed right in front of him. When one’s
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
102 Chapter 3
Consciousness is completely fixed on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one no longer
sees in terms of duality, or internal and external reality.
COMMENTARY
If  one  desires  to  concentrate  his  mind  on  the  Supreme  Lord,  he  should  study  the
example of the arrow maker. The arrow maker was so absorbed in his work that even
when the king passed by, with so much pomp and commotion, the arrow maker did not
even notice him.
PURPORT
The  only  way  to  withdraw  the  mind  from  the  objects  of  the  senses  is  to  eagerly
engage  in  the  devotional  service  of  Lord  Kåñëa.  When  the  mind  is  not  absorbed  in
fervently  desiring  to  please  the  Supreme  Lord,  it  wanders  on  the  subtle  platform  of
accepting and rejecting the things of this world. By surrendering unto the Supreme Lord
and engaging in His devotional service, one can be freed from the continuous struggle
for supremacy of the three modes of material nature. For one who is thus fully engaged,
the  spirit  of  enjoying  things  in  a  mood  of  being  separate  from  Kåñëa  will  not  affect
him. As long as a conditioned soul wanders within the kingdom of mental speculation,
having giving up Kåñëa’s service, he will remain fully absorbed in matter. In this regard,
one should carefully consider this verse of the Upadeçämåta:
atyähäraù prayäsaç ca prajalpo niyamägrahaù
jana-saìgaç ca laulyaà ca ñaòbhir bhaktir vinaçyati
One’s devotional service is spoiled when he becomes too entangled in the following
six activities:
1.  Eating more than necessary or collecting more funds than required.
2.  Over endeavoring for mundane things that are very difficult to obtain.
3.  Talking unnecessarily about mundane subject matters.
4.  Practicing the scriptural rules and regulations only for the sake of following them,
and not for the sake of spiritual advancement, or rejecting the rules and regulations of
the scriptures and working independently or whimsically.
5.  Associating  with  worldly-minded  persons  who  are  not  interested  in  Kåñëa
consciousness.
6.  Being greedy for mundane achievements.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Detachment from all that is Material
eka-cäry aniketaù syäd apramatto guhäçayaù
alakñyamäëa äcärair munir eko ‘lpa-bhäñaëaù
A  saintly  person  should  wander  about  alone,  without  any  companion  and  without
a fixed residence. Indeed, just to avoid bad association, he should be careful so that he
will not even be recognized by others. While traveling here and there, he should avoid
speaking more than what is absolutely necessary.
COMMENTARY
The  lesson  to  be  learned  from  the  snake  is  herein  described.  As  a  snake  wanders
about alone, out of fear of people, behaving in such a way that no one will notice it, an
introspective sage should conduct his life in the same manner.
PURPORT
The  propensity  for  material  enjoyment  is  the  cause  of  the  living  entities’  distress.
This propensity also covers his actual purpose in life. Instead of opposing the previously
followed  social  etiquette,  if  one  accepts  it  without  attachment  then  gradually  he  will
achieve  auspiciousness.  When  one  follows  the  varëäçrama  system,  he  takes  the  first
step  in  self-realization.  One  should  work  honestly  and  control  his  propensity  for
sexual  enjoyment,  either  by  completely  renouncing  it  as  a  brahmacäré  or  sannyäsé,
or by accepting the concession offered to the householder. Without regulating one’s
life,  everything  will  be  performed  whimsically,  so  that  it  will  be  impossible  to  make
spiritual advancement. A person’s attachment to society, friendship, and love is a great
impediment  on  the  path  of  spiritual  elevation.  If  one  maintains  such  attachments,
progress will be very slow. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu taught us by His personal example
what  a  devotee  should  and  should  not  do.  It  is  simply  obedience  to  these  principles
that will lead one to the perfection of life. There is no use in ways of mundane society,
which simply directs us toward the path of sense gratification.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
104 Chapter 3
gåhärambho hi duùkhäya viphalaç cädhruvätmanaù
sarpaù para-kåtaà veçma praviçya sukham edhate
For  the  living  entities  who  possess  perishable  material  bodies,  building  a  house  is
miserable and useless. A snake enters a hole created by others and lives happily.
PURPORT
Because the snake does not build its own house, but occupies a dwelling constructed
by  others,  it  does  not  become  entangled  in  the  miseries  of  building  a  residence.  The
ass-like people of this world have accepted a great burden by providing electric lights,
vehicles, fans, and so on, for the Vaiñëavas, and they should continue to do so. Because
Vaiñëavas are travelers on the path of spiritual life, they do not carry the great burden
of material advancement, because they abstract the essence of life. They do not undergo
great  inconvenience  just  for  the  comfort  of  their  bodies  but  instead  live  in  a  world
built by others without becoming attached to it. Expertise in the act of renovation and
preserving one’s family or society traditions is not the goal of those who travel on the
path of spiritual life.
eko näräyaëo devaù pürva-såñöaà sva-mäyayä
saàhåtya käla-kalayä kalpänta idam éçvaraù
eka evädvitéyo ‘bhüd ätmädhäro ‘khiläçrayaù
Näräyaëa,  is  the  worshipable  Lord  of  the  universe  and  of  all  the  living  entities
contained therein. Working independently, the Lord creates the cosmic manifestation by
directing His potency. To enact the annihilation of the universe, the Lord employs His
personal expansion, time, thus withdrawing everything to remain within Himself. Thus,
the Lord is the reservoir of all potencies. The pradhäna, which is the cause of the cosmic
manifestation, is conserved within the Lord and thus is non-different from Him. After
the annihilation of the universe, the Lord alone exists as one without a second.
COMMENTARY
The avadhüta brähmaëa says, “I have learned from the spider how the Supreme Lord
creates the universe. Lord Näräyaëa alone, without anyone’s help, created the universes
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Detachment from all that is Material
by  manipulating  His  energies,  under  the  control  of  time,  and  then  annihilated  them.
After the annihilation, the Lord remained as one without a second. All the conditioned
living entities, as well as the material energies, became merged within the Lord. Thus,
He is the shelter of all energies.”
TExTS 17-18
kälenätmänubhävena sämyaà nétäsu çaktiñu
sattvädiñv ädi-puruñaù pradhäna-puruñeçvaraù
parävaräëäà parama äste kaivalya-saàjïitaù
kevalänubhavänanda-sandoho nirupädhikaù
When His material energies, such as the mode of passion, are in a neutral condition,
by His influence in the form of time, the Lord remains as the supreme controller. The
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  is  the  controller  of  the  material  nature,  the  Lord  of
the puruçävatäras, the only shelter of the living entities, including the demigods, headed
by Brahmä. The Lord is fully transcendental, the personification of supreme bliss, the
primeval Lord, and the giver of liberation.
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Lord neutralizes the material energies, such as the mode of goodness,
by  displaying  His  potencies  in  the  form  of  time.  Even  in  that  neutral  state,  the  Lord
remains  the  controller  of  the  material  nature,  as  well  as  the  puruçävatäras.  He  is  the
supremely  worshipable  Lord  of  all  liberated  and  conditioned  souls.  Because  there  are
no  activities,  such  as  the  creation  of  the  universe,  in  that  neutral  state,  the  Supreme
Lord enjoys eternal happiness in His own mood, referred to as yoga-nidrä. He is called
nirupädhika because at that time, His energy, Maya, remains dormant. It is stated in the
Third Canto of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam that when the energies of the Supreme Lord
are dormant, He remains awake.
PURPORT
While trying to ascertain the nature of the Absolute Truth with the help of their
speculations,  conditioned  souls  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  is  impersonal.  Less
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
106 Chapter 3
intelligent people, under the grips of illusion, imagine that the living entities and the
Supreme Lord are one and the same. With this conclusion, they focus their attention on
the impersonal feature of the Supreme Lord. According to the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead creates, sustains, and annihilates this universe, which
is  under  the  control  of  time,  by  the  three  modes  of  material  nature.  The  supremely
independent Lord induces the conditioned living entities, who are His fragmental parts,
to dance as the enjoyers of the objects of the senses. When one gains practical experience
that the gross and subtle material bodies are simply coverings of the eternal soul, one
gives up the foolishness of material attachment and becomes attached to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. This is actual liberation, the highest form of which is to reside
in Vraja and relish supreme bliss, free from all material designations.
kevalätmänubhävena sva-mäyäà tri-guëätmikäm
saìkñobhayan såjaty ädau tayä sütram arindama
O subduer of the enemies, at the time of creation, the Personality of Godhead expands
His energy in the form of time and by glancing over His material energy, Maya, which is
composed of the three modes of material nature, the mahat-tattva becomes manifested.
COMMENTARY
After  describing  the  annihilation,  creation  is  now  being  described.  By  His  own
spiritual energy, the Supreme Lord awakens His material energy, Maya, and agitates her
by means of His glance. In this way, he creates the mahat-tattva, which consists of the
total material ingredients and the power of creation.
PURPORT
The fully cognizant Supreme Lord is the creator of the conditioned souls, and the
material world. The infinitesimal conditioned living entities can attain the ultimate goal
of life, love of God, by executing practical devotional service under the guidance of a
pure devotee. The conception that this material world is false, and that the infinitesimal
living entities can merge in the infinite Supreme Lord at the time of liberation is not
factual.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Detachment from all that is Material
täm ähus tri-guëa-vyaktià såjantéà viçvato-mukham
yasmin protam idaà viçvaà yena saàsarate pumän
The  compilers  of  the  scriptures  describe  the  mahat-tattva,  from  which  the  cosmic
manifestation springs, to be the effect of the three modes of material nature. Indeed, this
universe  is  resting  within  that  mahat-tattva,  and  due  to  its  potency,  the  living  entity
undergoes material existence.
COMMENTARY
The word täm in this verse indicates the mahat-tattva, which is the manifestation
of the three modes of material nature, and which creates the various planets, with the
help of the false ego. How have the varieties of planets and living entities been created?
This is described in the Vedas as follows: “O Gautama, it is the air that sustains all the
planets of the universe, and the varieties of living entities residing on them. The living
entities are traveling throughout the material existence by the force of air.”
PURPORT
The material creation is a manifestation of the Lord’s external energy, which covers
the  healthy  condition  of  the  living  entities,  who  are  spiritual  by  nature,  and  induces
them to become masters of the material universe, which is actually under the control
of time. By thinking themselves to be the enjoyers of material nature, the insignificant
living  entities  mistakenly  imitate  the  Supreme  Lord  and  thus  create  the  misfortune
of  wandering  within  the  conditional  state  of  material  existence  under  the  control  of
perverted desires. Undivided devotional service to the Supreme Lord is real liberation.
As soon as one is separated from the Lord’s service, due to the influence of Maya, one
tries to become the master. This is the actual fault of the living entities in this material
world, and it results from their aversion to the service of the Supreme Lord.
yathorëanäbhir hådayäd ürëäà santatya vaktrataù
tayä vihåtya bhüyas täà grasaty evaà maheçvaraù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
108 Chapter 3
Just  as  from  within  himself  the  spider  manifests  thread  through  its  mouth,  plays
with it for some time, and then eventually withdraws it within itself, the Supreme Lord
creates this universe from His own self, utilizes it for some time, and then He eventually
withdraws it within His own self.
COMMENTARY
The word ürëanäbhi indicates a spider. A spider releases threads from her heart
through her mouth, creates a web, and plays on it. Then again, it swallows the entire
web. In the same way, the Supreme Lord creates the entire universe from His own self
and then, after enjoying His pastimes, again withdraws it within His own self .
PURPORT
The  spirit  souls  wander  about  in  this  temporary  world,  which  was  created  by
the  Supersoul.  Just  as  a  spider  manifests  thread  from  its  body  and  then  again  winds
it  up  within  itself,  the  Supreme  Lord  creates  this  temporary  material  world,  which  is
a  manifestation  of  His  inferior  energy,  and  then  again  winds  it  up.  This  temporary
material world is under the control of time, it is limited, and it is full of miseries.
yatra yatra mano dehé dhärayet sakalaà dhiyä
snehäd dveñäd bhayäd väpi yäti tat-tat-svarüpatäm
Whatever a living entity concentrates his mind upon, whether out of affection, hatred,
or fear, he will certainly attain in his next life.
COMMENTARY
The avadhüta brähmaëa says, “The devotees of the Supreme Lord, who are attached
to meditating upon His transcendental form, easily attain the same bodily features as
the Lord. This is not at all wonderful. I have learned this lesson from the wasp.”
The next two verses describe the lesson to be learned from the wasp. When one’s
mind meditates upon a particular form without deviation, he will certainly attain that
form in the future.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Detachment from all that is Material
PURPORT
The living entity, who is embodied by gross and subtle matter, experiences affection,
hatred,  or  fearfulness  for  the  object  of  his  attachment  as  dictated  by  his  intelligence,
which is under the control of the spirit of material enjoyment. Ultimately. one attains
the  form  of  the  object  upon  which  he  meditates.  If  one  can  renounce  the  desire  for
material enjoyment and thus attract the attention of the unlimitedly affectionate Lord,
while  displaying  anger  towards  those  who  are  envious  of  the  Lord,  and  fear  of  the
consequences  of  absorption  in  sense  gratification,  he  can  attain  an  eternal  spiritual
form as a servant of the Supreme Lord in His transcendental abode.
kéöaù peçaskåtaà dhyäyan kuòyäà tena praveçitaù
yäti tat-sätmatäà räjan pürva-rüpam asantyajan
O King, once a tiny insect was captured and kept captive in a hive of a wasp. Out of
great fear, that tiny insect constantly meditated upon his captor so that, without giving up
its present body, it gradually assumed the form of a wasp. There is no doubt that whatever
one thinks of at the time of death, he will attain that state of existence in his next life.
COMMENTARY
The  insect  attained  the  same  bodily  features  as  the  wasp,  even  without  giving  up
its present body. This indicates that when one meditates on a particular form, he will
gradually come to resemble the object of his meditation. A good example of this is Dhruva
Mahäräja. Generally, a devotee who meditates upon the Lord gives up his material body
at the time of death and then attains a spiritual form, so that materialistic persons are
unable  to  perceive  the  transformation.  This  is  enacted  by  the  internal  energy  of  the
Supreme Lord. Sometimes, it appears that the spiritual body has been given up but such
pastimes  are  illusory.  Närada  Muné  has  explained  that  when  he  received  the  spiritual
body  of  an  associate  of  the  Lord,  his  material  body  was  instantaneously  relinquished,
just like a flash of lightning and its illumination occur simultaneously.
PURPORT
When  a  cockroach  sees  a  bright  green  insect,  it  becomes  so  afraid  that  it  begins
to meditate on it and thus becomes fully absorbed in its mood. Similarly, conditioned
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
110 Chapter 3
souls can become self-realized in this very lifetime by practicing Kåñëa consciousness. By
being established in the devotional service of the Supreme Lord, they attain liberation
even in the present life. Steady intelligence is the main criteria for achieving complete
absorption  in  the  object  of  one’s  meditation.  Being  bewildered  by  his  knowledge  of
the  external  world,  a  person  may  see  the  body  of  a  liberated  person  as  meant  for  his
enjoyment,  failing  to  understand  his  own  position  as  a  servant  of  the  Lord.  Internal
perfection is distinct from external appearances. Foolish people cannot understand this
and so they are unable to understand the intentions of perfected souls. If an ordinary
person  tries  to  understand  the  position  of  a  paramahaàsa  mahäbhägavata  with  the
help of his mundane perception, there is no doubt that he will pave his way to hell. In
this regard, one should carefully consider the verse that begins arcaye viñëau çilädhé. A
person’s assessment of a self-realized Vaiñëava’s external behavior becomes the cause of
his inauspiciousness. That is why the
api cet suduräcäraù verse has been presented in
the Bhagavad-Gita 9.30.
evaà gurubhya etebhya eñä me çikñitä matiù
svätmopaçikñitäà buddhià çåëu me vadataù prabho
O King, from these spiritual masters I have acquired great wisdom. Now, please listen
to what I have learned from my own body.
COMMENTARY
Now, the brähmaëa will speak about what he learned from his own body.
2 api cet suduräcäro bhajate mäm ananya-bhäk
sädhur eva sa mantavyaù samyag vyavasito hi saù
Even if a devotee sometimes seems to engage in abominable activities, he should be
considered a sädhu, a saintly person, because his actual identity is that of one engaged
in the loving service of the Lord. In other words, he is not to be considered an ordinary
human being.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Detachment from all that is Material
PURPORT
The avadhüta brähmaëa says, “I have provided my intelligence with many valuable
lessons after seeing the activities of various spiritual masters. Now, I will tell you what I
have learned from my own self.”
deho gurur mama virakti-viveka-hetur
bibhrat sma sattva-nidhanaà satatärty-udarkam
tattväny anena vimåçämi yathä tathäpi
pärakyam ity avasito vicarämy asaìgaù
The  material  body  is  also  my  spiritual  master  because  it  teaches  me  detachment.
Being a product of the material nature, it always comes to a painful end. Thus, although I
use my body to acquire knowledge, I always remember that it will ultimately be consumed
by others. Thus, in a mood of detachment, I wander about in this world.
COMMENTARY
The  avadhüta  brähmaëa  says,  “By  the  use  of  my  power  of  discrimination,  I  have
learned the lesson of detachment from my body, and so I also consider it to be a spiritual
master.  This  body  is  born  at  a  particular  time  and  ultimately  perishes.  In  this  way,  it
has taught me detachment. The stomach is a part of the body, and it can remain like
a mendicant without food for two or three days. This is another lesson I have learned
from my body. With the help of the senses of the body, I will cultivate devotional service
to the Lord by hearing and chanting. A pure devotee, despite contact with all varieties
of material tastes, does not become attached to them, although he is attached to tasting
the mellows of his relationship with Lord Hari. When one chews betel nuts, his tongue
remains red long after the betel nuts are spit out. By this example, one should know that
engagement in sense gratification will undoubtedly produce a lasting effect within the
mind. Actually, the material body does not belong to us—it will ultimately be enjoyed by
someone else. If it is discarded in a lonely place, dogs and jackals will eat it. If it is buried
after  death,  it  will  become  the  food  of  worms  and  germs.  After  considering  all  this,  I
have given up all attachment to my body and I simply wander about freely.”
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
112 Chapter 3
PURPORT
The avadhüta brähmaëa says, “My present diseased material condition is due to my
attachment for the objects of the senses. By utilizing both my gross and subtle bodies for
engagement in sense gratification, I have come under the control of time. This would
not be the case if my intelligence were fixed on attaining the Absolute Truth. Now, I
will give up all attempts to enjoy the objects of the senses, so that I will no longer be
materially  absorbed,  despite  living  in  a  material  body.”  The  proper  utilization  of  one’s
intelligence is to extract the essence from life in this material world, instead of becoming
overwhelmed by material attachment. This is the secret of serving the Supreme Lord,
which is distinct from a life of material enjoyment.
jäyätmajärtha-paçu-bhåtya-gåhäpta-vargän
puñnäti yat-priya-cikérñayä vitanvan
svänte sa-kåcchram avaruddha-dhanaù sa dehaù
såñöväsya béjam avasédati våkña-dharmaù
A man who is attached to his material body accumulates money with great struggle
to  maintain  his  wife,  children,  property,  domestic  animals,  servants,  homes,  relatives,
friends, and so on. Actually, one does all this for the gratification of his own body. As
a  tree  before  dying  produces  the  seed  of  a  future  tree,  the  dying  body  manifests  the
seed of one’s next material body in the form of accumulated karma. Thus assuring the
continuation of one’s material existence, the material body sinks down and dies.
COMMENTARY
One  may  question,  “The  material  body  is  the  best  of  all  spiritual  masters  because
it teaches one detachment, leading to engagement in devotional service. Although it is
temporary, one should take great care to preserve the material body, which enlightens
one with knowledge. If one does not properly adore his material body, he must certainly
incur the sin of ungratefulness. How can one remain detached from such a body?”
The  answer  is  that  the  material  body  does  not  instruct  one  like  a  benevolent
teacher, it teaches detachment by placing us in so much misery. A person remains busy
expanding his family empire because he wants to experience pleasure from it. It is only
due to attachment for his body that a person carefully maintains his family members. In
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Detachment from all that is Material
due course of time, the body will lose all capacity for material enjoyment, and then lay
down and die. A person’s karma creates the seed of his future life, and thus forces him
to continue suffering in material existence. When the seed of a tree is ripe, it falls. The
same principle applies to the material body.
PURPORT
A tree creates a seed that produces another tree before dying. Similarly, a conditioned
soul nourishes his wife, children, pet animals, wealth, and relatives with his hard-earned
money,  just  to  give  pleasure  to  his  own  gross  and  subtle  bodies,  and  these  acts  create
the seed of his future existence. After working hard in this way, a materially attached
person gives up his body at death. To see the gross and subtle material bodies as identical
with the soul is ignorance. Those who cannot discriminate between matter and spirit
are not on the level of intelligent people who very well understand the existence of the
eternal soul beyond the temporary material body.
jihvaikato ‘mum apakarñati karhi tarñä
çiçno ‘nyatas tvag udaraà çravaëaà kutaçcit
ghräëo ‘nyataç capala-dåk kva ca karma-çaktir
bahvyaù sapatnya iva geha-patià lunanti
As each wife of a householder who has many wives tries to attract her husband for
her own purpose—the tongue, genitals, sense of touch, belly, ears, nose, restless eyes, and
working senses, attract the embodied soul towards their respective objects of enjoyment.
COMMENTARY
One  should  feed  his  body  only  as  much  as  is  necessary  to  maintain  it,  without
attachment. This is the way to serve the body as one’s spiritual master. When one, due
to great attachment, provides the senses with whatever they ask for, the tongue demands
palatable food and engagement in gossip, thirst demands water, and the genitals demand
the association of women.
PURPORT
As a landlord is attracted by his many wives to fulfill their respective self-interests,
the objects of this world attract the working senses and knowledge-acquiring senses.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
114 Chapter 3
såñövä puräëi vividhäny ajayätma-çaktyä
våkñän sarésåpa-paçün khaga-dandaçükän
tais tair atuñöa-hådayaù puruñaà vidhäya
brahmävaloka-dhiñaëaà mudam äpa devaù
The  Supreme  Lord  first  created,  with  the  help  of  His  energy,  mäyä-çakti,  trees,
insects,  animals,  birds,  reptiles,  and  so  on  and  yet,  He  was  not  satisfied.  Finally,  the
Lord created the human body, which offers the conditioned soul sufficient intelligence to
realize Him, and thus He became pleased.
COMMENTARY
This  human  form  of  body,  which  can  award  one  liberation,  was  created  by  the
supreme  controller.  Therefore,  one  should  not  misuse  this  body  and  go  to  hell.  It  is
described  in  this  verse,  after  creating  various  types  of  bodies,  the  supreme  controller
was not satisfied and so He finally created the human body, considering it suitable for
awarding  the  conditioned  soul  the  opportunity  to  regain  His  association.  It  is  stated
in the Vedas that after creating the human form of body, the Supreme Lord achieved
immense happiness.
The Vedas state:
täbhyo gäm änayat tä abruvan na vai no ‘yam alam iti
täbhyo ‘çvam änayat tä abruvan na vai no ‘yam alam iti
täbhyaù puruñam änayat tä abruvan su-kåtaà bata
After creating various types of bodies, the Lord called for a cow and asked,
“Do you know the Supreme Lord?” She replied, “No. I cannot understand who is
the Supreme Lord.” Then, the Lord called a horse and asked it the same question.
The horse gave a similar reply. Then, the Lord called for human beings and asked
them  the  same  question.  They  replied,  “We  will  know  You  by  Your  mercy.”
(Aitareya Upanisad 1.2.2-3)
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord, with the help of His energy, creates the enjoyers and objects of
enjoyment, imbuing them with their respective propensities. However, the enjoyers, the
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Detachment from all that is Material
minute conditioned spirit souls, cannot be satisfied by enjoying limited and temporary
inert objects. Until the conditioned soul, who is a part and parcel of the Supreme Lord,
realizes that the attempt to enjoy material form, taste, sound, smell, and touch, without
self-realization, is most abominable, he will continue to suffer material miseries. However,
when he realizes his spiritual identity as the eternal servant of the Lord, he crosses over
the  influence  of  Maya  and  accepts  himself  as  being  maintained  and  protected  by  the
Lord. Such a pure devotee, being freed from false pride, never thinks of himself as the
maintainer or enjoyer.
labdhvä su-durlabham idaà bahu-sambhavänte
mänuñyam artha-dam anityam apéha dhéraù
türëaà yateta na pated anu-måtyu yävan
niùçreyasäya viñayaù khalu sarvataù syät
After  many  lifetimes  in  lower  species,  one  achieves  the  rare  human  form  of  life.
Although temporary, the human body gives one the opportunity to attain the perfection
of life. One who is actually intelligent should try to attain this perfection of life as long as
the body remains healthy. After all, sense gratification is available in all the other species
of life, whereas Kåñëa consciousness can only be cultivated by a human being.
COMMENTARY
Although this body is temporary, it awards eternal benefit. Therefore, one should try
to attain supreme auspiciousness as long as the body is functioning properly. One should
know for certain that the body is born, then dies, and then again one accepts another
birth, which are all temporary. Sense enjoyment, which is available in the human form
of life is also available for hogs, dogs, and horses.
PURPORT
The  conditioned  souls  are  subjected  to  the  cycle  of  repeated  birth  and  death.
Sometimes  one  becomes  a  demigod,  sometimes  a  human  being,  sometimes  an  animal,
and  sometimes  a  tree,  or  even  a  stone.  In  this  way,  the  eternal  soul  identifies  himself
in  various  ways,  according  to  the  body  that  he  receives.  According  to  his  particular
type of body, a living entity is destined to enjoy a particular set of sense objects. This
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
116 Chapter 3
is also true for a human being, but the human form of life affords one the opportunity
to  cultivate  knowledge  of  the  Absolute  Truth.  Therefore,  the  human  form  of  life  is
extremely desirable. Still, one cannot remain permanently in the human body.
Only the human form affords one the opportunity of attaining life’s ultimate goal.
Therefore, while situated in a human body, one should carefully consider how to attain
life’s perfection and not waste his valuable time gratifying his senses to no avail. Even
activities  meant  for  the  temporary  welfare  of  human  society  should  be  avoided.  One
should  only  cultivate  the  devotional  service  of  the  Lord  because  only  this  will  afford
him eternal benefit. One’s supreme benefit is obtained when one follows in the footsteps
of those who do not endeavor for material gain because they are always engaged in the
service of the Supreme Lord. Duties to family, society, and one’s occupation only seem
prominent as long as one does not strive for his ultimate benefit by surrendering to the
Lord. By the association of devotees, one awakens his eternal propensity for devotional
service.  Without  taking  shelter  of  the  association  of  devotees,  one  must  continue  to
suffer the threefold material miseries. Even when such non-devotees strive for liberation
from material miseries, they generally become impersonalists.
evaà saïjäta-vairägyo vijïänäloka ätmani
vicarämi mahém etäà mukta-saìgo ‘nahaìkåtaù
Having learned these lessons from my spiritual masters, I remain fixed in realization
of the Supreme Lord and, fully renounced and enlightened by realized spiritual knowledge,
I wander over the earth without mundane association or false ego.
COMMENTARY
In reply to King Yadu’s question, the brähmaëa said: “I have acquired knowledge in
this way. I have become detached from sense gratification, I have realized the presence
of the Supersoul by practical application of my acquired knowledge, I have become freed
from false ego, and I wander about this world, free from unnecessary association.”
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Detachment from all that is Material
na hy ekasmäd guror jïänaà su-sthiraà syät su-puñkalam
brahmaitad advitéyaà vai géyate bahudharñibhiù
Although God is one, sages have described Him in different manners. For this reason,
one may not be able to gain a complete understanding of God from one ordinary spiritual
master.
COMMENTARY
The  question  may  arise  that  since  the  Supreme  Lord  has  said,  tasmäd  guruà
prapadyeta jijïäsuù çreya uttamam: “One should take shelter of a self-realized spiritual
master who knows the science of the Absolute Truth and inquire from him about one’s
ultimate welfare,” then how can one have more than one guru? Çvetaketu and Båghu are
examples of those who had more than one guru.
In this regard, the brähmaëa replied, “It is true that I have only one initiating guru,
but in the field of practical activity, I have found these twenty five objects as providing
very good and bad examples to take lessons from, and so I have accepted them as my
çikñä-gurus,  or  instructing  spiritual  masters.  By  observing  examples  of  good  behavior
one will be strengthened in devotional service, and in seeing negative examples one will
be forewarned and avoid danger.”
“ I have learned to become detached from eight spiritual masters—the pigeon, fish,
deer, young girl, elephant, snake, moth, and kurara bird. I have learned both renunciation
of  the  temporary  and  acceptance  of  the  eternal  from  three  spiritual  masters—the
honeybee, the honey thief, and Piìgalä. I have learned how to cultivate interest in the
Supreme Lord from the other spiritual masters, beginning with the earth. Acceptance
of many instructing spiritual masters often helps to strengthen one’s convictions.”
PURPORT
The most correct meaning of the word Brahman is Lord Viñëu. There is no worthy
song  or  subject  for  hearing  other  than  that  which  glorifies  Lord  Väsudeva.  There  is
nothing  actually  worth  learning  in  this  world  other  than  knowledge  leading  to  the
devotional  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  Cultivating  knowledge  in  a  way  that  is  not
related to the Lord can do nothing more than enhance our material enjoyment.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 3
uddhava-gétä
çré-bhagavän uväca
ity uktvä sa yaduà vipras tam ämantrya gabhéra-dhéù
vanditaù sv-arcito räjïä yayau préto yathägatam
The  Supreme  Lord  said:  Having  thus  spoken  to  King  Yadu,  the  wise  brähmaëa
accepted obeisances and worship from the king. Feeling satisfied within himself, he left
exactly as he had come, after bidding the king farewell.
avadhüta-vacaù çrutvä pürveñäà naù sa pürva-jaù
sarva-saìga-vinirmuktaù sama-citto babhüva ha
O Uddhava, King Yadu, who was the forefather of our ancestors, became freed from
all material attachment so that his mind became fixed in tranquility after hearing these
statements of the avadhüta.
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Lord Kåñëa said to Uddhava: “After the brähmaëa, Dattätreya, had
instructed King Yadu, he departed out of his own sweet will, just as he had come.”
Thus  ends  the  translation  of  the  third  chapter  of  the  Uddhava-géta  entitled,
“Detachment  from  all  that  is  material,”  with  the  commentaries  of  Çréla  Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura and purports of Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 4
the nature of fruItIve aCtIvIty
CHAPTER SUMMARY
In  this  chapter,  Lord  Çré  Kåñëa  refutes  the  doctrines  of  philosophers  like  Jaiminé
and describes to Uddhava how the conditioned souls can develop pure transcendental
knowledge.
One  who  is  fully  surrendered  unto  the  Supreme  Lord  should  follow  the  Vaiñëava
dharma  that  is  described  in  the  Païcarätra  and  other  revealed  scriptures.  According
to  his  natural  qualities  and  work,  one  should  follow  the  rules  of  varëäçrama  without
duplicity.  So-called  knowledge  that  is  received  through  one’s  material  senses,  mind,
and intelligence is as useless as the dreams experienced by a person attached to sense
gratification. Therefore, one should give up work for sense gratification and accept work
as a matter of duty.
When  one  has  come  to  understand  something  of  the  truth  of  the  self,  he  should
give up material work performed out of duty and simply dedicate himself completely to
the service of the bona fide spiritual master, who is the manifest representative of the
Personality  of  Godhead.  A  disciple  should  have  firm  faith  in  his  spiritual  master,  he
should be anxious to learn from him the science of the soul, and he should be free from
envy and the tendency to indulge in nonsense talk.
The spirit soul is separate from both the gross and subtle bodies. An embodied soul
accepts  different  kinds  of  bodies  according  to  his  karma.  Only  a  bona-fide  spiritual
master is able to impart the knowledge of self-realization. By refuting the philosophies
of Jaiminé and others, Lord Çré Kåñëa explains that the embodied soul who has come in
contact  with  segmented  material  time  takes  upon  himself  a  perpetual  chain  of  births
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
120 Chapter 4
and deaths and is therefore forced to suffer the resultant happiness and distress. Thus,
there  is  no  possibility  that  one  who  is  attached  to  the  fruits  of  his  material  work  can
achieve  any  substantial  goal  in  life.  The  pleasures  of  heaven,  which  are  achieved  by
performing  sacrificial  rituals,  can  be  experienced  for  only  a  short  time.  After  one’s
heavenly  enjoyment  is  finished,  one  must  return  to  this  mortal  sphere  to  partake  of
lamentation and suffering. On the path of materialism, there is certainly no uninterrupted
happiness.
çré-bhagavän uväca
mayoditeñv avahitaù sva-dharmeñu mad-äçrayaù
varëäçrama-kuläcäram akämätmä samäcaret
The Supreme Lord said: One who is surrendered unto Me should tirelessly practice
Vaiñëava dharma as prescribed by Me in scriptures such as the paï carätra. He should
also perform his occupational duties according to the system of varnäçrama, which is a
favorable condition for accepting spiritual life.
COMMENTARY
In this chapter, the cultivation of spiritual knowledge, the living entities’ bondage as
a result of their contact with matter, and the refutation of philosophers like Jaiminé are
described.  Having  given  Uddhava  many  valuable  lessons  by  narrating  the  story  of  an
avadhüta brähmaëa, the Supreme Lord now describes the process of sädhana. He says,
“O Uddhava, you should follow the varnäçrama dharma, and the devotional practices
described by Me in the scriptures like the païcarätra.”
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord said: One should take shelter of Me and work under My direction
while  following  the  system  of  varnäçrama.  If  one  gives  up  My  shelter  and  engages  in
fruitive activities due to material attachment, he will never attain his ultimate welfare.
When one follows varnäçrama dharma and family traditions simply for amassing pious
merit rather  than for engagement in My service, one is certainly misdirected and will
never attain eternal benefit. Despite executing one’s duties as prescribed by Me in the
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Nature of Fruitive Activity
Vedas,  and  rejecting  all  prohibited  activities,  if  one  does  not  take  shelter  of  Me,  then
his endeavor is ultimately useless. On the other hand, if one engages in My devotional
service  without  deviation,  there  is  no  necessity  for  performing  the  religious  duties
prescribed in the Vedas. When My unalloyed devotees fail to observe all the rules and
regulations prescribed in the Vedas, they should never be considered as misguided.
anvékñeta viçuddhätmä dehinäà viñayätmanäm
guëeñu tattva-dhyänena sarvärambha-viparyayam
A transcendentalist should see that because the conditioned souls who are dedicated
to sense gratification have falsely accepted the objects of sense pleasure as reality, all of
their endeavors are doomed to failure.
COMMENTARY
How is it possible to give up material desires? The reply given here is that one should
see  the  disastrous  result  obtained  by  materialistic  people  who  consider  the  temporary
manifestations  of  this  world  to  be  ultimate  reality.  By  such  an  observation,  one  will
certainly become detached from the aspiration to enjoy such objects that will disappear
in due course of time.
PURPORT
When the conditioned souls come to realize the utter futility of their endeavors to
enjoy the temporary manifestations of this world, they certainly become detached.
suptasya viñayäloko dhyäyato vä manorathaù
nänätmakatväd viphalas tathä bhedätma-dhér guëaiù
A sleeping person may see many objects of sense gratification in his dreams but such
things are merely creations of his mind and are thus of no benefit to him. Similarly, one
who  is  asleep  to  his  spiritual  identity  sees  many  sense  objects  in  this  world,  but  they
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
122 Chapter 4
are  all  creations  of  the  Lord’s  illusory  potency  and  have  no  permanent  existence.  One
who meditates upon the temporary objects of the senses therefore uselessly engages his
intelligence.
COMMENTARY
Because the results of material work are temporary, they cannot provide one with
lasting benefit and are thus considered useless. Materialistic activities can never bring
one to the perfection of life or free one from the pangs of material existence. Material
intelligence, when impelled by the senses, strongly desires sense gratification, and thus
separates one from one’s real self-interest. Such diverted intelligence will never be able
to understand the Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa. The devotees
of the Lord, however, fix their intelligence upon Him by meditating upon the His form,
qualities, pastimes, and devotees. In this way, their intelligence is never separated from
the Absolute Truth. As stated in Bhagavad-gétä (2.41):
vyavasäyätmikä buddhir ekeha kuru-nandana
bahu-çäkhä hy anantäç ca buddhayo ’vyavasäyinäm
Those who are on this path are resolute in purpose, and their aim is one. O
beloved child of the Kurus, the intelligence of those who are irresolute is many-
branched.
PURPORT
The sense objects observed in one’s dreams are of no value, just as the objects seen
in the waking state are ultimately useless, because they are temporary.
nivåttaà karma seveta pravåttaà mat-paras tyajet
jijïäsäyäà sampravåtto nädriyet karma-codanäm
One  who  has  fixed  his  mind  on  Me,  making  Me  his  goal  of  life,  should  give  up
activities  of  sense  gratification  and  should  instead  engage  in  the  regulated  practice  of
devotional service. On the other hand, when one is fully endeavoring for self-realization,
he has no need to follow the scriptural injunctions regarding fruitive activities.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Nature of Fruitive Activity
COMMENTARY
A materialistic person does whatever is pleasing to his senses. One who acts according
to  religious  principles  regulates  his  material  enjoyment  in  a  way  that  is  prescribed  in
the scriptures. Those who are advancing toward the transcendental platform, however,
desist from all activities of sense gratification. In Bhagavad-gétä (6.3-4) it is stated:
ärurukñor muner yoga karma käraëam ucyate
yogärüòhasya tasyaiva çamaù käraëam ucyate
For one who is a neophyte in the eightfold yoga system, work is said to be
the means; and for one who is already elevated in yoga, cessation of all material
activities is said to be the means.
yadä hi nendriyärtheñu na karmasv anuñajjate
sarva-saìkalpa-sannyäsé yogärüòhas tadocyate
A person is said to be elevated in yoga when, having renounced all material
desires, he neither acts for sense gratification nor engages in fruitive activities.
PURPORT
There  is  no  need  for  those  who  are  engaged  in  the  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord
to  perform  fruitive  activities  with  a  desire  to  enhance  their  worldly  enjoyment.  One
should  remain  aloof  from  the  activities  of  sense  gratification  and  instead  engage  in
unalloyed devotional service to the Supreme Lord. Engagement in devotional service to
the Supreme Lord is real freedom from material desires. The paths of sense gratification
and renunciation are always full of contradictions whereas the service of the Supreme
Lord is the doubtless path of perfection.
yamän abhékñëaà seveta niyamän mat-paraù kvacit
mad-abhijïaà guruà çäntam upäséta mad-ätmakam
One who has surrendered unto Me, accepting Me as the goal of life, should follow all
the rules that forbid sinful activities. One should also try his best to follow all the sub-
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
124 Chapter 4
religious principles, such as those dealing with cleanliness. One should approach a bona
fide spiritual master who is intimately related to Me, and who is thus very peaceful, and
is non-different from Me.
COMMENTARY
One should very carefully control his senses and follow the scriptural injunctions for
morality, such as non-violence and cleanliness. These rules will be more fully described
later on. One who is intelligent should faithfully render service to a self-realized spiritual
master, who has full knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
It  is  the  eternal  duty  of  everyone  to  worship  his  spiritual  master,  who  is  always
engaged in the service of the Supreme Lord. The devotees of the Lord are always engaged
in devotional service, which is concomitantly inclusive of activities, such as yama and
niyama. If one is indifferent to the service of Lord Hari, one’s guru, and the Vaiñëavas,
one can never achieve eternal benefit.
amäny amatsaro dakño nirmamo dåòha-sauhådaù
asatvaro ‘rtha-jijïäsur anasüyur amogha-väk
A  disciple  of  the  spiritual  master  should  be  freed  from  false  pride,  false  ego,  and
laziness. He should give up all sense of proprietorship over the objects of the senses, even
his wife and children, and he should have firm faith and affection for his spiritual master.
He  should  be  steady,  always  desiring  advancement  in  spiritual  understanding,  and  he
should not envy anyone, and should avoid useless talk.
COMMENTARY
The  duties  of  a  disciple  are  being  described.  The  disciple  should  not  expect  any
respect for himself. He should not envy anyone, and he should be expert and free from
material  attachment.  He  should  have  firm  faith  in  the  spiritual  master,  as  well  as  his
worshipable Lord. He should always be eager to engage in devotional service and thus
attain his goal of life. One who wants to advance in spiritual understanding should not
find fault in others, and should always avoid idle talk.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Nature of Fruitive Activity
jäyäpatya-gåha-kñetra- svajana-draviëädiñu
udäsénaù samaà paçyan sarveñv artham ivätmanaù
A  sincere  disciple  is  equal  to  everyone.  He  should  remain  detached  from  his  wife,
children, household, property, relatives, wealth, and so on.
COMMENTARY
How can one be without a sense of proprietorship? For example, a wealthy materialist
will feel equally attached as the proprietor of all his various assets but if some are taken
away  by  thieves  or  the  government,  he  gives  up  attachment  for  them.  An  intelligent
person should understand that everything he possesses will not remain for long and thus
he should cultivate a mood of detachment.
The son of Citraketu said in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (6.16.6-7):
yathä vastüni paëyäni hemädéni tatas tataù
paryaöanti nareñv evaà jévo yoniñu kartåñu
nityasyärthasya sambandho hy anityo dåçyate nåñu
yävad yasya hi sambandho mamatvaà tävad eva hi
Just as gold and other commodities are continually transferred from one place
to another in due course of purchase and sale, so the living entity, as a result of
his fruitive activities, wanders throughout the entire universe, being injected into
various bodies in different species of life by one kind of father after another.
Relatively few living entities are born in the human species, and others are
born as animals. Although both are living entities, the relationships they establish
are impermanent. An animal may remain in the custody of a human being for
some time, and then the same animal may be transferred to the possession of other
human beings. As soon as the animal goes away, the former proprietor no longer
has a sense of ownership. As long as the animal is in his possession, he certainly
has an affinity for it, but as soon as the animal is sold, the affinity is lost.
As far as the spiritual master and the Lord are concerned, one should simply keep
firm faith at their lotus feet.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
126 Chapter 4
PURPORT
A  devotee  of  the  Lord  should  not  consider  himself  to  be  the  enjoyer  of  his  wife,
children, house, land, friends, and other possessions, knowing them to be intended for
the Lord’s service, just like himself. He should not try to  demand respect from others
with a desire to enjoy fame and reputation. He should become free from envy, laziness,
and material attachment. He should be inquisitive, devoid of pride, truthful, and steady
in his determination.
vilakñaëaù sthüla-sükñmäd dehäd ätmekñitä sva-dåk
yathägnir däruëo dähyäd dähako ‘nyaù prakäçakaù
Just as a blazing fire is different from the wood it burns to provide illumination, so
the knower within the material body is different from the body itself, which is pervaded
by the consciousness of the soul. It should be firmly understood that the spirit soul and
the body have different characteristics because they are two distinct entities.
COMMENTARY
One should not maintain the false egoistic conception of “I” and “mine” in relation
to the material body. The gross and subtle bodies covering the living entities are made
of the material elements but the spirit soul is transcendental to matter. The spirit soul
possesses the transcendental qualities of the Lord, but in minute quantity. In this verse,
the  soul  is  described  as  self-enlightened.  Because  the  conditioned  soul  is  enlightened
by  the  mercy  of  the  Lord,  one  may  question  how  this  can  be.  Although  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead certainly furnishes the living entity with consciousness, being
endowed with the potency of the Lord, has himself the capacity to revive and expand
his pure consciousness.
In this regard, the soul is compared to gold and silver, which, although having no
power  of  self-illumination,  brightly  reflect  the  rays  of  the  sun.  Thus,  it  may  be  said
that gold and silver possess the power to illuminate, although not independently. This
verse gives an example to illustrate how the spirit soul is distinct from the body. Just as
fire is distinct from the wood it burns, the soul is distinct from the body it illuminates
with consciousness. In the conditional state, the spirit soul is compared to fire that is
dormant within wood. When the conditioned soul is enlightened, on the strength of his
spiritual knowledge, he can burn his ignorance to ashes, just as fire burns wood.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Nature of Fruitive Activity
PURPORT
Just  as  fire  is  separate  from  the  wood  it  burns—one  is  that  which  burns  and  the
other is that which is burnt—the spirit soul is distinct from the gross body and subtle
mind. He is self-manifest and minutely independent.
nirodhotpatty-aëu-båhan- nänätvaà tat-kåtän guëän
antaù praviñöa ädhatta evaà deha-guëän paraù
Just as fire manifested from wood takes different shapes, according to the condition
of the fuel, the embodied soul enters various material bodies and thus accepts varieties of
bodily characteristics.
COMMENTARY
Although fire may be sometimes visible and sometimes not, the element fire always
exists. Similarly, the soul may appear within a body and then depart but still, the soul is
eternal. It is a mistake to impose material conditions upon the spirit soul, who has nothing
to do with the material body. As fire is sometimes blazing, some times great, sometimes
small, and sometimes extinguished, the spirit soul is sometimes born, sometimes in the
body of Brahmä, sometimes in the body of an ant, and sometimes departs from the body
at death.
PURPORT
Fire,  although  separate  from  the  object  it  burns,  appears  in  various  ways,  as  big,
small, blazing, or extinguished, according to the condition of the fuel. In the same way,
the spirit soul, being averse to the Supreme Lord, identifies himself with his gross and
subtle bodies, although he is distinct from them and eternal.
yo ‘sau guëair viracito deho ‘yaà puruñasya hi
saàsäras tan-nibandho ‘yaà puàso vidyä cchid ätmanaù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
128 Chapter 4
The  subtle  and  gross  material  bodies  are  created  by  the  material  modes  of  nature,
which  are  creations  of  the  illusory  energy  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.
Material existence occurs when the living entity falsely accepts the qualities of the gross
and subtle bodies as being his self. This illusory state, however, can be destroyed by real
knowledge.
COMMENTARY
The  question  may  arise  that  since  fire  is  produced  from  wood,  and  fire  has  never
been seen independently of any fuel, it may be assumed that the existence of the soul is
dependent upon the gross and subtle material bodies. The answer is that only through
the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead’s  knowledge  potency  (vidyä)  can  one  clearly
understand the nature of the living entity. By such real knowledge, one may cut material
existence to pieces and even in this lifetime experience spiritual reality. Our material
existence is an artificial imposition. By the Lord’s inconceivable potency of nescience,
the qualities of gross and subtle material forms are imposed upon the living being, and
because  of  misidentification  with  the  body,  he  initiates  a  series  of  illusory  activities.
When,  by  the  mercy  of  the  Lord,  the  conditioned  souls  are  freed  from  the  material
conception of life, having revived their original consciousness, they become free from
material bondage.
PURPORT
Those living entities who are averse to the Supreme Lord forget their constitutional
position and become conditioned by material existence, so that they consider their gross
and subtle bodies as their self. However, a pure spirit soul is not bewildered by material
existence, which keeps the rebellious souls under a spell of illusion.
tasmäj jijïäsayätmänam ätma-sthaà kevalaà param
saìgamya nirased etad vastu-buddhià yathä-kramam
Therefore, after careful consideration, one should approach the Supreme Personality
of  Godhead,  who  is  the  cause  and  effect  of  everything,  while  renouncing  the  false
conception that this world is an independent reality.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Nature of Fruitive Activity
COMMENTARY
The spirit soul is covered by gross and subtle bodies. One should understand that the
spirit soul is completely distinct from these gross and subtle material bodies. Gradually,
on the strength of one’s sädhana, one should rise above the conception that the material
body is the self.
PURPORT
When  one  comes  to  the  platform  of  self-realization,  he  should  inquire  about  his
duty and then dedicate himself to the service of the Supreme Lord. While engaged in
devotional service, one should remain detached from thoughts of enjoying the objects
of the senses, which are all creations of Maya. It is only due to a lack of inquisitiveness
that a foolish person fails to attain knowledge of the Absolute Truth.
äcäryo ‘raëir ädyaù syäd ante-väsy uttaräraëiù
tat-sandhänaà pravacanaà vidyä-sandhiù sukhävahaù
The spiritual master is compared to the lower kindling wood. The disciple is compared
to  the  upper  kindling  wood,  and  the  instructions  imparted  by  the  spiritual  master  are
compared to the wood placed between these two. The fire of knowledge that is produced
by the interaction of these three destroys the darkness of ignorance and gives happiness
to both the spiritual master and the disciple.
COMMENTARY
The knowledge received from the spiritual master is capable of burning ignorance
and its effects to ashes. When two sticks are rubbed together, the friction produces fire.
Similarly, the spiritual master imparts instructions to his disciple, and this knowledge
destroys the disciple’s ignorance, burning his desire for material enjoyment to ashes.
PURPORT
Knowledge  of  self-realization  is  produced  by  linking  the  living  entities,  who  are
conditioned by Maya, with a spiritual master, who is in full knowledge of the Absolute
Truth. Just as fire is produced when one rubs two sticks, the knowledge of self-realization
is  attained  by  the  disciple  who  is  under  the  shelter  of  the  lotus  feet  of  the  spiritual
master.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
130 Chapter 4
vaiçäradé säti-viçuddha-buddhir dhunoti mäyäà guëa-samprasütäm
gunäàç ca sandahya yad-ätmam etat svayaà ca çäàyaty asamid yathägniù
By  submissively  hearing  from  a  bonafide  spiritual  master,  one  receives  perfect
understanding that dispels the illusion of material existence which is due to the influence
of the three modes of material nature. Ultimately, the quest for perfect knowledge ceases
when one has become fully satisfied on the spiritual platform.
COMMENTARY
Perfect  knowledge  comes  from  the  expert  spiritual  master,  and  it  removes  the
bondage  to  material  existence  created  by  attachment  to  the  gross  and  subtle  bodies.
After  establishing  one  on  the  transcendental  platform,  where  one  becomes  absorbed
in  thoughts  of  the  Lord,  the  fire  of  knowledge  becomes  extinguished,  just  as  fire  is
extinguished after all the fuel is consumed.
PURPORT
Just as fire is extinguished when there is no more supply of fuel, similarly, a disciple
who  receives  transcendental  knowledge  from  the  expert  spiritual  master  is  able  to
free  himself  from  the  clutches  of  the  three  modes  of  material  nature.  Only  then  the
intelligence is purified and one becomes inclined towards the Supreme Lord.
TEXTS 14-16
athaiñäm karma-kartèëäà bhoktèëäà sukha-duùkhayoù
nänätvam atha nityatvaà loka-kälägamätmanäm
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Nature of Fruitive Activity
manyase sarva-bhävänäà saàsthä hy autpattiké yathä
tat-tad-äkåti-bhedena jäyate bhidyate ca dhéù
evam apy aìga sarveñäà dehinäà deha-yogataù
kälävayavataù santi bhävä janmädayo ‘sakåt
My  dear  Uddhava,  I  have  thus  imparted  perfect  knowledge  unto  you.  There  are
other  philosophers,  however,  who  arrive  at  a  different  conclusion.  They  say  that  the
conditioned souls should engage in fruitive activities because they are the enjoyers of the
happiness and unhappiness that are derived from the results of their work. According to
this understanding, the cosmic manifestation, including the time, the scriptures, and the
souls are transforming in a perpetual cycle. Just as the objects of this world are constantly
transforming, so knowledge based on such objects is also impermanent and ever-changing.
My dear Uddhava, if this philosophy is accepted, there will be no escape from the cycle of
repeated birth and death, accompanied by old age and disease, as the living beings accept
material bodies that are subject to the influence of time.
COMMENTARY
Lord  Kåñëa  says,  “My  dear  Uddhava,  in  the  instructions  I  have  given  to  you,  I
clearly indicated the ultimate goal of life. There are those who would not agree with My
teachings, however, such as the followers of Jaimini. If you are inclined to accept their
materialistic  philosophy  instead  of  My  instructions,  then  listen  to  what  I  have  to  say
about that.”
“According  to  the  philosophy  of  Jaimini,  the  living  entity  is  constitutionally  the
performer  of  fruitive  activities,  and  such  actions  are  the  causes  of  his  happiness  and
distress. The energy or nature that forms the world we live in, the time under which we
are controlled, the revealed scriptures that lead us on the path of advancement, and the
subtle bodies that are the medium through which we experience happiness and distress,
although constantly being transformed, remains eternally.”
“The living being need not renounce sense gratification, either due to understanding
the temporary nature of existence, or by seeing the world as an illusory creation of Maya.
According to such a materialistic philosophy, the objects of this world, even the bodies
of beautiful women, are temporary manifestations of an eternal nature. Thus, creation,
maintenance, and destruction are the three phases of eternal existence. By executing
fruitive  rituals  that  are  prescribed  by  the  Vedas,  one  can  maintain  his  aristocratic
position,  which  affords  him  the  possession  of  women  and  wealth  birth  after  birth.  In
this way, one can go on enjoying sense gratification eternally.”
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
132 Chapter 4
“Such philosophers say that the universe eternally exists in some form or another
and thus imply that there is no need to suppose that there is a God who created it. They
claim that the cosmic manifestation is therefore real, and not illusory. In this way, they
defy the conception of an eternal soul having an eternal spiritual form, which is now
covered by matter. They say that knowledge is derived from sense perception and is not
coming from some kind of Absolute Truth, and therefore knowledge itself is subject to
change, just as are the objects that it perceives.”
“In this way, materialistic philosophers conclude that although the material nature is
unlimitedly transformable, it still exists eternally. By thinking in this way, such persons
are  more  inclined  to  follow  the  path  of  advancing  material  enjoyment,  instead  of  the
path of renunciation. They see liberation as a state of pure consciousness without any
activity or variety. Indeed, many such philosophers feel that liberation is an abnormal
state of existence because the liberated souls would be without any activity or enjoyment.
Even if we accept for the sake of argument that their philosophy is correct, we would still
have to conclude that a path of regulated sense enjoyment would never provide ultimate
happiness,  but  instead,  would  simply  award  countless  miseries.  For  this  reason,  even
from a materialistic point of view, detachment is in the living being’s self-interest.”
taträpi karmaëäà kartur asvätantryaà ca lakñyate
bhoktuç ca duùkha-sukhayoù ko nv artho vivaçaà bhajet
Although  the  person  who  engages  in  fruitive  activities  hopes  to  become  eternally
happy, it is practically seen that materialists are mostly miserable and only rarely actually
satisfied.  This  proves  that  the  conditioned  souls  are  not  independent,  nor  are  they  in
control of their destiny. When a person is always under someone else’s control, how can
he expect to get anywhere by acting independently?
COMMENTARY
It is practically seen that when one performs fruitive activities, he is still under the
control  of  destiny  and  thus  rarely  achieves  the  fulfillment  of  his  desires.  If  there  was
actual freedom, then who would have to suffer miseries? What intelligent person would
allow himself to suffer the miseries of birth, death, old age, and disease? Therefore, the
conclusion is that the living entities are dependent upon a higher authority.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Nature of Fruitive Activity
PURPORT
The performer of activities enjoys happiness or distress, being under the control of
time. In modern times, inventions have been created to eliminate the inconveniences
of  life,  but  the  maintenance  and  production  of  such  conveniences  has  proven  to  be
unbearably inconvenient for hundreds of millions of people throughout the world. Only
the most foolish person will propose that there is no superior controller and that one
can achieve favorable results simply by expert performance of material activities.
na dehinäà sukhaà kiïcid vidyate viduñäm api
tathä ca duùkhaà müòhänäà våthähaìkaraëaà param
It is observed within this world that sometimes even a learned person feels distressed,
whereas a great fool may feel happy. Therefore, it is simply a manifestation of false ego to
think that by the expert performance of karma, one can achieve happiness.
COMMENTARY
It can be argued that a person could continuously perform pious activities, avoiding
all  sinful  acts,  and  thus  never  suffer,  because  misery  is  caused  by  acting  sinfully.  The
answer  is  that  you  will  never  find  anyone  in  this  world  who  is  always  happy,  or  who
is  always  distressed.  Sometimes  it  is  seen  that  pious  men  are  in  a  miserable  condition
and  sinful  men  are  happy.  The  conclusion  is  that  even  pious  men  sometimes  perform
forbidden acts, and even sinful men sometimes perform unknown pious activities, such
as traveling to a holy place or serving a saintly person.
PURPORT
The  living  entities  who  are  averse  to  Kåñëa  are  always  under  the  control  of  the
three modes of material nature. Because of this, whether they are in knowledge or in
ignorance, they do not become lastingly happy.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
134 Chapter 4
yadi präptià vighätaà ca jänanti sukha-duùkhayoù
te ‘py addhä na vidur yoga måtyur na prabhaved yathä
Even if someone was able to somehow achieve only happiness and completely avoid
distress in this life, he still  would have to succumb to all-devouring death.
COMMENTARY
Even if one is very learned, he is certainly ignorant of how to stop death.
PURPORT
Although learned people under the influence of the illusory energy of the Lord may
display expertise in the field of achieving happiness and avoiding distress, they are still
unable to save themselves from the hands of imminent death.
ko ‘nv arthaù sukhayaty enaà kämo vä måtyur antike
äghätaà néyamänasya vadhyasyeva na tuñöi-daù
Death is certainly very horrible. Since everyone in this world is just like a prisoner
condemned to be executed, what actual happiness can be derived from the objects of this
world and the gratification that they offer?
COMMENTARY
If  you  say  that  there  is  happiness  before  death,  the  answer  is  that  a  man  who  is
condemned to die cannot enjoy the sumptuous meal placed before him. A person who is
going to be executed cannot feel happiness, even if you give him nice sweet rice or milk
cakes because such things are simply a reminder that he will soon die. Therefore, this
belief that wealth and sense gratification can give one happiness in this world of birth
and death is herein refuted.
PURPORT
Can  the  temporary  happiness  which  is  available  in  this  world  protect  one  who
knows that he is always under the control of inevitable death? Palatable food offered to
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Nature of Fruitive Activity
a condemned person is not relished by him because of the chilling thought of imminent
death.
çrutaà ca dåñöa-vad duñöaà spardhäsüyätyaya-vyayaiù
bahv-antaräya-kämatvät kåñi-vac cäpi niñphalam
The material happiness that is available in the heavenly planets is discussed in the
Vedas,  but  it  is  simply  a  royal  version  of  the  happiness  found  on  earth.  Life  here  and
life in heaven are both polluted by envy, deterioration, and death. Just as a farmer has
to  contend  with  many  problems  while  growing  crops,  such  as  drought  or  the  attack  of
insects, similarly, the attempt to become happy, whether on earth or in heaven, is fraught
with many difficulties.
COMMENTARY
After concluding that there is no happiness in this world, it is being described that
there is no happiness in the heavenly planets as well. The information that there is ample
happiness in the heavenly planets is illusory. In heaven, there is arrogance because one
person is envious of others’ happiness, and there is destruction when one’s accumulated
piety  is  exhausted.  As  agriculture  is  troublesome,  and  sometimes  unproductive,  the
performance of sacrifice and other pious acts, which award one heavenly residence, is
ultimately of no avail.
PURPORT
When the farmer plants his crops, he has to worry about so many potential problems,
such as defective seeds, drought, plagues of insects, excessive heat, and so on. Similarly,
the  attempt  to  enjoying  happiness  in  this  world,  whether  on  earth  or  in  heaven,  is
accompanied by anxiety due to jealousy, cheating, and so on. When conditioned souls
interact,  there  is  naturally  competition  and  envy  because  that  is  the  very  nature  of
material existence. Due to the influence of time, no position within the material world
is stable and so, when there are reverses, violence and intrigue create great disturbances,
both  here  and  in  heaven.  Even  the  attempt  to  attain  a  heavenly  destination  is  also
fraught with many difficulties. Therefore, one should enquire about the eternal abode
of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  which  is  far  beyond  the  disturbances  of  this
material world.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
136 Chapter 4
antaräyair avihito yadi dharmaù sv-anuñöhitaù
tenäpi nirjitaà sthänaà yathä gacchati tac chåëu
Even if one properly performs Vedic sacrifices and fruitive rituals without committing
any  mistake  or  offense,  the  result  of  attaining  the  heavenly  planets  obtained  by  such
activities will be destroyed in due course of time. Listen as I now explain this to you.
COMMENTARY
Even  if  one  avoids  mistakes  and  offenses  while  performing  Vedic  rituals,  it  is
impossible to avoid the miseries felt at the time of destruction. This is being described
in the following five verses.
PURPORT
Unless one very carefully executes religious rituals, various obstacles will come in his
way. But, even if one is able to perform such rituals properly, and without encountering
any obstacles, the result obtained is temporary because, whether good or bad, all material
conditions are imperfect.
iñöveha devatä yajïaiù svar-lokaà yäti yäjïikaù
bhuïjéta deva-vat tatra bhogän divyän nijärjitän
Pious  people  attain  the  heavenly  planets  by  worshiping  the  demigods  with  the
performance of Vedic sacrifices. By means of their accumulated piety, they enjoy heavenly
pleasures just like the demigods.
PURPORT
The demigods award their worshipers their desired goal. People who perform Vedic
sacrifices to please the demigods attain the heavenly planets as a result of their worship
and  thus  enjoy  heavenly  pleasures.  Such  enjoyment,  however,  is  temporary  and  the
worshipers of the demigods have to return to earth after exhausting their pious merit.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Nature of Fruitive Activity
sva-puëyopacite çubhre vimäna upagéyate
gandharvair viharan madhye devénäà hådya-veña-dhåk
After ascending to the heavenly planets, one who had previously performed numerous
sacrifices will ride in an effulgent celestial chariot, which he is awarded as the result of his
past pious activities. He is glorified by the Gandharvas and dressed in gorgeous clothing
as he enjoys life in the company of heavenly damsels.
COMMENTARY
The word devé in this verse refers to the Apçaräs, or celestial women.
strébhiù kämaga-yänena kiìkiné-jäla-mälinä
kréòan na vedätma-pätaà suräkréòeñu nirvåtaù
In the company of celestial women, the enjoyer of the results of sacrifice travels to
heavenly  gardens  in  a  wonderful  airplane,  which  is  decorated  with  circles  of  tinkling
bells and which moves according to his desire. Being relaxed, comfortable, and happy in
heavenly pleasure gardens, he does not consider that he is exhausting the results of his
previously-acquired piety and will soon fall down to the mortal world.
COMMENTARY
The phrase käma yäna means “traveling at will in his celestial airplane.”
tävat sa modate svarge yävat puëyaà samäpyate
kñéëa-punyaù pataty arväg anicchan käla-cälitaù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
138 Chapter 4
For as long as his pious merit remains, the performer of sacrifice enjoys life in the
heavenly  planets.  When  his  pious  merit  is  exhausted,  however,  he  falls  down  from  the
pleasure gardens of heaven, being moved against his will by the force of eternal time.
COMMENTARY
Being driven by time, one again falls down to this planet of birth and death.
TExTS 27-29
yady adharma-rataù saìgäd asatäà väjitendriyaù
kämätmä kåpaëo lubdhaù straiëo bhüta-vihiàsakaù
paçün avidhinälabhya preta-bhüta-gaëän yajan
narakän avaço jantur gatvä yäty ulbaëaà tamaù
karmäëi duùkhodarkäëi kurvan dehena taiù punaù
deham äbhajate tatra kià sukhaà martya-dharmiëaù
If a person engages in sinful activities, either due to bad association or his unwillingness
to control his senses, he will certainly become mad due to having desires that are impossible
to fulfill. Such a person hardly cares for others, is very greedy, and always seeking the
opportunity to enjoy the bodies of women. When the mind is contaminated in this way,
one  does  not  hesitate  to  commit  violence  and  thus  he  slaughters  poor  animals  for  the
satisfaction  of  the  tongue.  Sometimes  worshiping  ghosts  and  spirits,  such  a  bewildered
person is not better than an animal and after death, he goes to hell, which is a manifestation
of the darkest mode of material nature. Receiving a hellish body, he continues to perform
horrible activities that insure his future misery. What happiness can there be for one who
engages in activities that culminate in death?
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Nature of Fruitive Activity
COMMENTARY
There  are  two  classes  of  those  who  perform  karma—the  pious  and  the  impious.
After describing the destination of pious persons, the destination of impious persons is
now being described. One who is not self-controlled is certainly lusty, and such a person
afflicted by lust becomes very miserly. Such a greedy person, who is overwhelmed by the
thirst  for  material  enjoyment,  becomes  henpecked  due  to  being  addicted  to  enjoying
sex  with  women.  He  performs  animal  sacrifices  that  are  opposed  to  the  principles  of
religion,  to  fulfill  his  insatiable  desires.  The  phrase  ulbaëamtamaù  refers  to  the  non-
moving living entities, such as trees. Such persons who are engaged in fruitive activities
never achieve tangible happiness. This is the conclusion of these verses.
PURPORT
Impious people engage in irreligious activities. Becoming addicted to sinful activities,
they  are  intemperate,  lusty,  miserly,  greedy,  henpecked,  and  violent,  either  due  to
the  association  of  other  sinful  people,  or  due  to  being  unable  to  control  their  senses.
Such  impious  persons  indulge  in  unrestricted  sexual  enjoyment,  slaughter  countless
animals for the satisfaction of their tongues, and try to forget their miseries by means of
intoxication. In this way, they transgress all prescribed rules and regulations. Eventually
such persons become influenced by ghosts and spirits, who deprive them of all ability
to discriminate between right and wrong. Losing all sense of decency, they become fit
candidates for entrance into the darkest modes of material existence.
Those  who  are  ignorant  of  the  glories  of  devotional  service  engage  in  fruitive
activities  with  a  desire  to  enjoy  the  flickering  pleasures  of  sense  gratification.  As  a
result,  when  their  duration  of  life  comes  to  an  end,  they  are  transferred  to  another
body to enjoy or suffer the results of their past fruitive activities. Considering all this,
one should  never aspire for  material happiness. Material life is so horrible because no
matter what one’s duration of life might be, one will still always be afflicted with fear of
death. Even Brahmä is afraid of death, and so what to speak of us, who live for no more
than one hundred years. Considering this, what possible happiness can there be for the
conditioned souls?
lokänäà loka-pälänäà mad bhayaà kalpa-jévinäm
brahmaëo ‘pi bhayaà matto dvi-parärdha-paräyuñaù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
140 Chapter 4
In all the planetary systems, from the heavenly planets down to the hellish planets,
even the demigods who live for a kalpa, and even Brahmä, who lives for two paräradhas,
are afraid of Me in My form of time.
COMMENTARY
One may imagine that the heavenly planets and the pleasure experienced there are
eternal, but this is being refuted in this verse. Neither the heavenly planets nor its rulers
are eternal. Even Brahmä is afraid of the Supreme Lord. This is stated in the Vedas:
bhéñäsmäd vätaù pavate bhéñodeti süryaù
bhéñäsmäd agniç candraç ca måtyur dhävati païcamaù
It is out of fear of the Supreme Brahman that the wind is blowing, out of fear
of Him that the sun regularly rises and sets, and out of fear of Him that fire acts.
It is only due to fear of Him that death and Indra, the King of heaven, perform
their respective duties. (Taittiréya Upaniñad 2.8)
From this statement, the supreme authority of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
is clearly established, and the belief that Brahmä is the supreme person is refuted.
guëäù såjanti karmäëicguëo ‘nusåjate guëän
jévas tu guëa-saàyukto bhuìkte karma-phaläny asau
It is the material senses that perform pious and sinful activities, it is the three modes
of  material  nature  that  inspire  the  senses  to  engage  in  fruitive  activities,  and  it  is  the
living entity who enjoys the fruit of his karma, with the help of his senses.
COMMENTARY
It  was  previously  described  how  sinful  living  entities  are  degraded  to  a  hellish
condition  of  life.  Now,  the  question  may  arise  as  to  whether  the  living  entities  are
helpless or are they the master of their own destiny? The answer is that it is the senses
that worship the demigods and perform other ritualistic activities. It is the senses that
enjoy intimate association with another’s wife, and perform other abominable acts, thus
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Nature of Fruitive Activity
creating the destiny of the living entity. It is due to being impelled by the three modes
of material nature that the senses create one’s future body. The minute independence
of the living entity consists of how he chooses to associate with the modes of nature. It
is in this way that the living entity experiences suffering or enjoyment of his pious and
sinful acts.
PURPORT
According to the Bhagavad-gétä, one’s activities are impelled by the three modes of
material nature. As long as one thinks himself to be the doer of activities, he remains
on  the  platform  of  false  ego.  Until  one  comes  to  the  platform  of  self-realization,  he
continues to experience lamentation and illusion. The conditioned soul can be liberated
if he gives up his separatist mentality and engages in the devotional service of the Lord.
When one is under the shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he is removed
form the disturbing influence of the external energy of the Lord. By the perfection of
devotional service to the Lord, one realizes his original identity of eternity, knowledge,
and bliss, so that he goes to reside in Vaikuëöha, the eternal abode of the Lord.
yävat syäd guëa-vaiñamyaà tävan nänätvam ätmanaù
nänätvam ätmano yävat päratantryaà tadaiva hi
As long as the living entity remains under the control of the three modes of material
nature, he will attain various forms of life, such as a demigod, animal, and so on. As long
as the living entity remains in the bodily concept of life, thinking himself to be the doer,
he will have to experience the good and bad results of his karma.
COMMENTARY
When  the  living  entity  is  forgetful  of  his  relationship  with  Kåñëa,  he  considers
this material world as ultimate reality. Thus, he wanders among various species of life,
sometimes as a hog, sometimes as a bird, and sometimes as a demigod.
PURPORT
While considering himself to be the doer of activities, the conditioned soul continues
to wander through varieties of material bodies, one after another. In such a condition of
life, one is incapable of understanding that behind this temporary manifestation is the
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
142 Chapter 4
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Unless one is situated in his constitutional position
as the eternal servant of the Lord, one will remain falsely proud of being the proprietor
of all he surveys, and the performer of heroic activities. In the human form of life, the
conditioned soul may begin to worship five demigods for the fulfillment of his material
desires. In such a situation, one thinks of the material world, which is a creation of the
Lord’s external energy, as being an object of his enjoyment.
yävad asyäsvatantratvaà tävad éçvarato bhayam
ya etat samupäséraàs te muhyanti çucärpitäù
As  long  as  the  living  entities  remain  dependent  upon  fruitive  activities  under  the
control  of  the  modes  of  nature,  they  will  continue  to  fear  because  I  am  the  giver  of
the results of karma. Those who accept the material concept of life, taking this cosmic
manifestation to be factual, will devote themselves to material enjoyment and therefore
remain absorbed in lamentation and illusion.
COMMENTARY
Here, the Supreme Lord chastises those who say that the path of material enjoyment
is  auspicious.  Those  who  praise  the  performance  of  fruitive  activities  are  themselves
tormented by lamentation and illusion.
PURPORT
The living entity is trapped in a network of illusion. Even if he can understand that
he is dependent upon someone superior, he is not inclined to serve the Supreme Lord.
This causes him to suffer in so many ways, however. Dreaming of sense gratification, the
conditioned  soul  always  fears  the  destruction  of  the  arrangements  he  has  so  carefully
made. Simply engaged in trying to perfect his eating, sleeping, mating, and defending,
of material nature, he glides down to the lower species of life.
Maya has two potencies—the covering potency and the throwing potency. When
one  is  covered  by  Maya,  he  forgets  his  original  consciousness,  so  that  she  throws  him
into the darkness of ignorance. When one foolishly thinks that he is independent of the
Supreme  Lord, he becomes enamored by temporary material objects, hoping to enjoy
sense gratification. The result is that when a person grows older, his life becomes filled
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Nature of Fruitive Activity
with fear and anxiety. A conditioned soul falsely considers himself to be in control of
his life, but because he is not in control, he is forced to suffer against his will. Truthfully,
material life is abominable. It is only due to illusion that we think it to be satisfactory.
käla ätmägamo lokaù svabhävo dharma eva ca
iti mäà bahudhä prähur guëa-vyatikare sati
Due to the interaction of the three modes of material nature, the conditioned souls
described Me in various ways as the time, the soul, the religious principles, the universal
form, one’s own nature, and so on.
COMMENTARY
According to some opinion, the material nature, time, the scriptures, and the soul
are  eternal.  The  word  svabhäva  means  “nature,”  which  is  attributed  to  a  conditioned
soul.  When  the  three  modes  of  material  nature  cover  the  intelligence  of  the  living
entity, he considers the form of the Lord as a creation of mäyäçakti. This misconception
can be removed by the will of the Lord and thus everyone should strive to get freed from
the bondage of karma and engage in the devotional service of the Lord.
PURPORT
When  the  intelligence  of  the  conditioned  soul  is  covered  by  the  external  energy
of the Lord, he forgets the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In such a condition, some
people refer to Him as time, some refer to Him as the Vedic literature, some refer to Him
as nature, and some refer to Him as religious principles. In this way, various fragmental
understandings of the potencies of the Lord are understood.
´Î3{H 3HÌ=
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
144 Chapter 4
çré-uddhava uväca
guëeñu vartamäno ‘pi deha-jeñv anapävåtaù
guëair na badhyate dehé badhyate vä kathaà vibho
Çré Uddhava said: My dear Lord, the souls of this world are conditioned by the three
modes of material nature and thus they experience the happiness and distress that results
from  the  activities  performed  under  their  direction.  How  can  the  conditioned  souls  be
considered  as  independent?  One  can  argue  that  the  living  entity  is  spiritual  in  nature
and thus has nothing to do with this material world. If this is the fact, then how has he
become bound up by nature?
COMMENTARY
It appears to ordinary people that even liberated souls also eat, sleep, walk, talk, and
perform  other  similar  activities,  just  as  they  do.  Considering  this,  how  can  it  be  said
that a liberated soul is not bound by his gross and subtle bodies, which act under the
direction of the three modes of material nature? It may be questioned that if the soul is
like the sky in that it never mixes with anything, then how it became conditioned by
material nature? Uddhava presents such arguments just to clear up the understanding
of actual spiritual life.
PURPORT
Conditioned  souls  under  the  influence  of  the  three  modes  of  material  nature
describe  the  Absolute  Truth  as  nonexistent,  or  as  possessing  material  qualities,  or  as
being devoid of all qualities, or as being a neuter object like a eunuch. How can a spirit
soul, who is now conditioned by the modes of nature, be freed from the bodily concept
of life? If the transcendental spirit soul is never actually touched by Maya, then why is
he referred to as conditioned?
TEXTS 36-37
kathaà varteta viharet kair vä jïäyeta lakñaëaiù
kià bhuïjétota visåjec chayétäséta yäti vä
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Nature of Fruitive Activity
etad acyuta me brühi praçnaà praçna-vidäà vara
nitya-baddho nitya-mukta eka eveti me bhramaù
O  Acyuta,  the  living  entity  is  sometimes  described  as  eternally  conditioned  and
at  other  times  as  eternally  liberated.  Because  of  this,  I  am  not  able  to  understand  the
actual situation of the living entity. My Lord, You are the best of those who are expert
in answering philosophical questions. Please explain to me the symptoms by which one
can tell the difference between a living entity who is eternally liberated and one who is
eternally  conditioned.  In  what  ways  are  they  situated,  and  how  do  they  enjoy  life,  eat,
evacuate, lie down, sit, and move about?
COMMENTARY
Uddhava  says,  “As  long  as  the  living  entities  identify  themselves  as  products  of
matter, they continue to remain conditioned by the illusory energy. As soon as they are
free from this misconception, they become liberated from material bondage. If this is a
fact, then how can I recognize who is liberated and who is conditioned?”
Uddhava goes on to say, “Both liberated and conditioned souls eat, pass stool and
urine, sleep, sit, walk, and talk. How can I recognize who is performing these activities
under the direction of the modes of nature, and who is acting free from Maya’s influence?
Personalities  like  Dattätreya  and  Bharata  were  eternally  liberated  souls,  whereas
Devadatta and Yajïadatta were eternally conditioned souls. Since their bodily activities
appear similar, I am confused, being unable to differentiate between them. Therefore,
please  tell  me  how  one  can  recognize  an  eternally  conditioned  soul  and  an  eternally
liberated soul.”
PURPORT
In the Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 20:109 & 20:117) it is stated:
jévera ‘svarüpa’ haya—kåñëera ‘nitya-däsa’
kåñëera ‘taöasthä-çakti’ ‘bhedäbheda-prakäça’
It is the living entity’s constitutional position to be an eternal servant of Kåñëa
because he is the marginal energy of Kåñëa and a manifestation simultaneously
one with and different from the Lord.
kåñëa bhuli’ sei jéva anädi-bahirmukha
ataeva mäyä täre deya saàsära-duùkha
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 4
uddhava-gétä
By  forgetting  Kåñëa,  the  living  entity  has  become  materialistic  since  time
immemorial. Therefore, the illusory energy of Kåñëa is giving him different types
of miseries in material existence.
Conditional  and  liberated—both  these  states  are  adjectives.  These  two  natures,
when  seen  from  two  different  angles,  are  known  by  two  different  names.  According
to the difference in the propensity of service the conditioned and liberated states are
ascertained., When one is manifested, the other disappears.
Thus ends the translation of the fourth chapter of the Uddhava-géta entitled “The
Nature  of  Fruitive  Activity”  with  the  commentaries  of  Çréla  Viçvanätha  Cakravarté
Öhäkura  and  chapter  summary  and  purports  by  Çréla  Bhaktisiddhänta  Sarasvaté
Öhäkura.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 5
the symPtoms of CondItIoned and LIberated LIvIng entItIes
CHAPTER SUMMARY
In  this  chapter,  Lord  Çré  Kåñëa  describes  to  Uddhava  the  difference  between
conditioned and liberated living entities, the characteristics of a saintly person, and the
various limbs of devotional service.
In  the  previous  chapter,  Uddhava  had  inquired  about  the  difference  between
conditioned and liberated souls. In His reply, the supremely cognizant Çré Kåñëa states
that although the spirit soul is His part and parcel, on account of his infinitesimal nature,
he  comes  in  contact  with  the  material  energy,  which  causes  him  to  accept  covering
designations of the modes of goodness, passion, and ignorance. Thus, he has been bound
up since time immemorial. But, when the spirit soul cultivates spiritual knowledge and
achieves the shelter of devotional service, he becomes designated as eternally liberated.
Therefore, transcendental knowledge is the cause of the living entity’s liberation, and
ignorance is the cause of his bondage. Both knowledge and ignorance are products of
the  illusory  energy  of  Lord  Çré  Kåñëa  and  thus  are  His  eternal  potencies.  The  living
entities who are captivated by the three modes of material nature are bewildered by false
ego, which causes them to see themselves as the enjoyer of miseries, illusion, happiness,
distress,  danger,  and  so  on.  They  thus  remain  absorbed  in  thoughts  of  such  things,
although they have no existence in the spiritual world.
Both  the  individual  spirit  soul  and  the  Supersoul  reside  within  the  same  body.
The difference between the two is that the Supersoul, being fully cognizant, does not
indulge  in  enjoying  the  fruits  of  actions  but  rather  remains  as  a  witness,  whereas  the
infinitesimal  conditioned  soul,  being  ignorant,  suffers  the  consequences  of  his  own
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 5
uddhava-gétä
actions.  The  liberated  soul,  in  spite  of  being  within  a  material  body  because  of  the
remaining reactions of his past activities, does not become disturbed by the happiness
and suffering of the body. He sees such bodily experiences in the same way that a person
who has just awakened from a dream sees his dream experiences. On the other hand,
a conditioned soul, who actually has nothing to do with bodily happiness and distress,
nevertheless imagines himself the enjoyer of his bodily experiences, just as a dreaming
person imagines his dream experiences to be real.
Just  as  the  sun  reflected  in  water  is  not  bound  up  by  the  water,  and  just  as  the
air  is  not  confined  to  some  particular  segment  of  the  sky,  a  detached  person  takes
advantage  of  his  broad  vision  of  the  world  to  cut  off  all  his  doubts  with  the  sword
of  proper  renunciation.  Since  his  life  force,  senses,  mind,  and  intelligence  have  no
tendency  to  become  fixed  on  sense  objects,  he  remains  liberated  even  while  situated
within the material body. Regardless of whether he is harassed or worshiped, he remains
equipoised. He is therefore considered liberated even in this life. A liberated person has
nothing to do with the piety and sin of this world, but rather sees everything equally.
A self-satisfied sage does not praise or condemn anyone. He does not speak uselessly to
anyone and does not fix his mind on material things. Rather, he is always absorbed in
meditation upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, so that in the eyes of fools, he
seems to be a speechless, crazy person.
Even if one has studied and has been taught all the Vedic literatures, if he has not
developed a taste for the devotional service of the Supreme Lord, he has accomplished
nothing more than his own labor. One should study only those scriptures that glorify
the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His transcendental pastimes, and that contain
narrations of His various incarnations. By doing so, one gains the highest good fortune
whereas by studying scriptures other than these, one simply acquires misfortune.
With firm determination, one should understand the true identity of the spirit soul
and then give up his false identification with the material body. Thereafter, he should
offer himself at the lotus feet of Lord Çré Kåñëa, who is the reservoir of all love and thus
attain  actual  peace.  The  mind  that  is  under  the  sway  of  the  three  modes  of  material
nature is unable to concentrate upon the Absolute Truth. After many lifetimes, faithful
persons  who  have  performed  sacrifices  for  the  attainment  of  religiosity,  economic
development, and sense gratification can begin the process of hearing and chanting of
the Supreme Lord’s transcendental pastimes. Such persons then achieve the association
of  a  bona-fide  spiritual  master  and  saintly  devotees.  Thereafter,  by  the  mercy  of  the
spiritual master, they begin following the path of the mahäjanas and thus attain self-
realization.
Having heard these instructions from Lord Çré Kåñëa, Uddhava further desired to
hear about the characteristics of a saintly person, and about various aspects of devotional
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Symptoms of Conditioned and Liberated Living Entities
service. Lord Kåñëa replied that one who possesses these twenty-six qualities is actually a
sadhu or Vaiñëava. He is merciful, nonenvious, always truthful, self-controlled, faultless,
magnanimous, gentle, clean, nonpossessive, helpful to all, peaceful, dependent on Kåñëa
alone, free from lust, devoid of material endeavor, steady, in control of the six enemies
of  the  mind,  moderate  in  eating,  never  bewildered,  always  respectful  to  others,  never
desirous of respect for himself, sober, compassionate, friendly, poetic, expert and silent.
The principal characteristic of a sädhu is that he takes shelter of Kåñëa alone. One who
knows  that  Çré  Kåñëa  is  the  unlimited,  indwelling  Lord  who  possesses  a  form  that  is
eternal, full of knowledge and bliss, and thus engage in His service without deviation, is
a topmost devotee.
Lord Çré Kåñëa next described to Uddhava the sixty-four limbs of devotional service.
Among these are: seeing, touching, worshiping, serving, glorifying and offering obeisances
to the Deity of the Lord and His pure devotees; developing attachment for hearing the
chanting  of  the  Lord’s  qualities,  pastimes,  and  so  on;  remaining  always  in  meditation
upon the Lord; offering everything one acquires to the Lord; accepting oneself to be the
Lord’s servant; offering the Lord one’s heart and soul; engaging in glorification of the
Lord’s birth and activities; observing holidays related to the Lord; performing festivals
in the Lord’s temple in the company of other devotees, with music, singing and dancing;
celebrating all varieties of yearly functions; offering food to the Lord; taking initiation
according  to  the  Vedas  and  tantras;  taking  vows  related  to  the  Lord;  being  eager  to
establish Deities of the Lord; endeavoring either alone or in association with others in
constructing, for the service of the Lord, vegetable and flower gardens, temples, cities,
and so on; humbly cleansing the temple of the Lord; and rendering service to the Lord’s
house by painting it, washing it with water and decorating it with auspicious designs.
After  this,  the  process  of  worshiping  the  Deity  of  the  Supreme  Lord  is  briefly
described.
çré-bhagavän uväca
baddho mukta iti vyäkhyä guëato me na vastutaù
guëasya mäyä-mülatvänna me mokño na bandhanam
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
150 Chapter 5
The Supreme Lord said: My dear Uddhava, the three modes of material nature work
under My control, sometimes designating the living entities as conditioned and sometimes
granting  them  liberation.  Truthfully,  the  living  entities  are  never  really  conditioned  or
liberated, just as I remain unchanged as the Supreme Absolute Truth, the master of all
potencies.
COMMENTARY
In this chapter, the Lord describes to Uddhava characteristics of conditioned and
liberated souls, the symptoms by which one can recognize saintly persons, and the limbs
of devotional service.
The Lord tells Uddhava that his question is unnecessary because the soul is never
really bound by the material nature. It is simply an illusion to think that the materal
body, which is created by the influence of the three modes of material nature, is the self.
Only due to such illusion does the living entity suffer, just as one experiences distress
in a dream. Of course, materal nature is not an illusion—it actually exists, just as the
living entities also exist, both being potencies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
It is the dream that he is a part of the material nature that constitutes the illusion of
the living entity. Thus, the soul is never actually bound because his existence is always
superior to that of matter.
PURPORT
The  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  is  the  master  of  all  potencies.  It  is  only  by
speculation  that  the  ignorant  conditioned  souls  imagine  that  the  Lord  is  devoid  of
variegatedness.  Although  the  living  entity  is  part  and  parcel  of  the  Lord’s  superior
potency, he now identifies with the inferior potency of the Lord and thus experiences
conditional  life.  The  living  entity  is  liberated  when  contacts  the  superior  potency  of
the Lord, which has three divisions—hlädiné, or spiritual pleasure; sandhiné, or eternal
existence;  and  saàvit,  or  all-pervading  knowledge.  The  Lord’s  existence  is  sac-cid-
änanda and He never becomes forgetful. The living entities, however being minute in
quantity, are sometimes conditioned and sometimes liberated.
The neutral state of the three modes of material nature is called pradhäna. When
the three modes of material nature interact, they compete for control over the tiny living
entities, thus creating a variety of manifestations. When the conditioned soul desires to
free himself from the entanglements caused by the modes of material nature, he must
take to the devotional service of the Lord, which can elevate him to the spiritual world.
In the spiritual sky, everyone possesses spiritual bodies that are not subject to change.
In such a liberated state of existence, there is no possibility of being influenced by the
three modes of material nature.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Symptoms of Conditioned and Liberated Living Entities
After understanding one’s eternal nature, one can see that he was never really a part
of this material world. On the spiritual platform, there is no existence of the conception
of liberation and bondage. Being the marginal energy of the Supreme Lord, one should
use his minute independence to engage in the Lord’s devotional service and thus revive
his original consciousness, which is eternal, full of knowledge, and full of bliss. In such
a state, there is no chance of once again falling into illusion.
çoka-mohau sukhaà duùkhaà dehäpattiç ca mäyayä
svapno yathätmanaù khyätiù saàsåtir na tu västavé
Just as a dream is an illusory creation of the mind, so lamentation, illusion, happiness,
distress, and the bodily concept of life are simply creations of My illusory energy. That is
to say, materal existence is essentially illusory.
COMMENTARY
The nature of material bondage is being described in this verse. Lamentation, illusion,
happiness, and distress, are all related to the material body. Gross bodily designations
are accepted by the subtle body and thus a living entity falsely identifies himself as the
enjoyer of material nature. Material existence, which is full of lamentation and illusion
Is not factual reality because it is a temporary display of the Lord’s external energy, just
like a dream, and thus has no relation with the eternal spirit soul.
PURPORT
The  illusioned  soul  forgets  his  eternal  existence  and  imagines  that  there  is  no
Supreme Truth. Even in its most advanced stages, material life is simply ignorance. Just
as when one dreams, there is no question of a pleasant dream being more real than a
nightmare, so heavenly and hellish material existences are equally illusory. This material
world is a manifestation of the Lord’s external energy, just as the eternal spiritual sky is
a manifestation of His internal energy. Although material nature is infinitely mutable
and thus has no stable condition, it is real and not simply an illusion, like a mirage in the
desert, because it is an emanation from the Supreme Reality. It is only our mistaking the
material body as the self that constitutes illusion. One should therefore wake up from
the dream of bodily identification and see the reality of the eternal Supreme Personality
of Godhead.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
152 Chapter 5
vidyävidye mama tanü viddhy uddhava çarériëäm
mokña-bandha-karé ädye mäyayä me vinirmite
O Uddhava, you should understand that both ignorance and knowledge are creations
of My Maya. Being expansions of My potency, they are beginningless, and are the cause
of the living entities’ bondage and liberation.
COMMENTARY
It may be questioned how Maya, being illusion, can influence the eternal spirit soul.
The answer is that both knowledge and ignorance are two manifestations of the Lord’s
powerful energy, and which are the causes of liberation and bondage. Knowledge awards
liberation and ignorance causes bondage. Being creations of the eternal energy of the
Lord, knowledge and ignorance are beginningless, unlimited, and inexhaustible. In the
Vedic  literature,  it  is  described  that  the  Supreme  Lord  has  an  eternal  energy  known
as  Maya,  which  manifests  in  three  features—vidyä,  avidyä,  and  pradhäna.  Pradhäna
creates  the  material  world,  avidyä  creates  the  conditioned  souls’  misconceptions,  and
vidyä removes those misconception and awards enlightenment.
PURPORT
The living entity, being the marginal energy of the Lord, can exist under the shelter
of  either  knowledge  or  ignorance.  When  the  living  entity  takes  shelter  of  vidyä,  he
remains in the liberated condition and when he takes shelter of avidyä, he remains in
bondage. Vidyä and avidyä are the two eternal energies of the Supreme Lord. Followers
of the viçiñöädvaita philosophy address the living entities as cit and the material world
as acit. According to the Vedic statement, yathäbhäso yathä tamaù, Çré Jéva Gosvämé
has described the living entities as jévamäyä and matter as guëamäyä. It is the mistaken
identification of the living entities with matter that causes illusory material existence,
or ignorance. When the living entities can see himself as the superior potency of the
Lord, giving up his misidentification with the inferior potency of matter, he can return
to his blissful condition in the spiritual sky.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Symptoms of Conditioned and Liberated Living Entities
ekasyaiva mamäàçasya jévasyaiva mahä-mate
bandho ‘syävidyayänädir vidyayä ca tathetaraù
O  intelligent  Uddhava,  the  eternal  living  entities  are  My  parts  and  parcels,  for  I
am  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  Ignorance  is  the  cause  of  the  living  entities’
bondage, and knowledge is the cause of their liberation.
COMMENTARY
The  two  energies  of  the  Lord,  vidyä  and  avidyä,  influence  the  marginal  potency,
or living entities. When they are under the influence of avidyä, the living entities are
conditioned  and  when  they  are  under  the  influence  of  vidyä,  they  are  liberated.  As
stated in the Bhagavad-gétä (7.5):
apareyam itas tv anyäà prakåtià viddhi me paräm
jéva-bhütäà mahä-bäho yayedaà dhäryate jagat
Besides  this  inferior  nature,  O  mighty-armed  Arjuna,  there  is  another,
superior energy of Mine, consisting of all living entities who are struggling with
material nature and are sustaining the universe.
There  are  many  statements  in  the  Vedic  literature  indicating  that  the  Absolute
Truth  is  one.  Here  the  living  entities  are  described  as  innumerable,  being  fragmental
parts and parcels of the Lord. How can this apparent contradiction be reconciled? Lord
Caitanya has informed us that the living entities are inconceivably simultaneously one
with and different from the Absolute Truth.  The external energy of the Lord has two
features—avidyä  and  vidyä.  Under  the  influence  of  these  potencies  the  propensities
of the jévaçakti and mäyäçakti are eternally manifest. It is stated in the Vedas (Kaöha
Upaniñad 2.2.13),:
nityo nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm
eko bahünäà yo vidadhäti kämän
The Lord is the prime eternal among all eternals. He is the supreme living
entity of all living entities, and He alone is maintaining all life.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
154 Chapter 5
When the living entities are freed from the influence of avidyä they attain liberation.
However,  the  liberation  of  merging  into  the  existence  of  Brahman  is  condemned.  A
devotee, although united with the Lord, keeps his individuality intact.
As stated in the Viñëu Puräëa (6.7.61):
viñëu-çaktiù parä proktä kñetra-jïäkhyä tathä parä
avidyä-karma-saàjïänyä tåtéyä çaktir iñyate
The potency of Lord Viñëu is summarized in three categories—namely, the
spiritual potency, the living entities and ignorance. The spiritual potency is full
of  knowledge;  the  living  entities,  although  belonging  to  the  spiritual  potency,
are subject to bewilderment; and the third energy, which is full of ignorance, is
always visible in fruitive activities.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is one without a second and the innumerable living entities, both
conditioned and liberated, are His eternal fragmental parts and parcels. The conditioned
souls have been under the influence of avidyä since time immemorial. However, with
the help of vidyä, they can attain liberation. Although the parts and parcels of the Lord
are sometimes liberated and sometimes conditioned, there is no question of conditioning
or liberation for the Lord Himself. Avidyä and vidyä can exert their supremacy over the
parts and parcels of the Lord, but not the Lord Himself.
atha baddhasya muktasya vailakñaëyaà vadämi te
viruddha-dharmiëos täta sthitayor eka-dharmiëi
O  Uddhava,  I  shall  now  describe  the  difference  between  the  embodied  spirit  soul,
who possesses the two contradictory natures of misery and happiness, and the eternally
liberated Supreme Personality of Godhead.
COMMENTARY
In the previous chapter, Uddhava inquired from the Lord about the symptoms by
which one can understand who is a conditioned soul and who is a liberated soul. In reply,
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Symptoms of Conditioned and Liberated Living Entities
the Lord explained that the characteristics of bondage and liberation may be understood
in  two  divisions—as  the  difference  between  the  ordinary  conditioned  soul  and  the
eternally  liberated  Personality  of  Godhead,  or  as  the  difference  between  conditioned
and liberated living entities in the jéva category. The Vedas confirm that the Supersoul
is  untouched  by  material  contamination.  The  difference  between  the  spirit  soul  and
the Supersoul will be described in the following verses. The conditioned soul is full of
lamentation whereas the Supersoul is full of bliss. They are both situated in the same
body, but one of them is fully independent and the other is completely dependent on
the independent Lord.
PURPORT
When the respective symptoms of the conditioned and liberated souls are carefully
considered, there appears to be two contradictory natures. The conditional state is full
of lamentation, and liberated state is the platform of boundless happiness. The Supersoul
is the controller of all energies and the spirit soul, being the marginal energy, is always
controlled.
suparëäv etau sadåçau sakhäyau yadåcchayaitau kåta-néòau ca våkñe
ekas tayoù khädati pippalännam anyo niranno ‘pi balena bhüyän
There are two birds, the living entity and the Supersoul, who live together in a nest
(heart)  of  a  tree  (the  material  body).  They  are  similar  in  nature,  both  being  spiritual,
and they are inseparable friends. One bird (the living entity) enjoys the fruit of the tree,
whereas the other bird (the Supersoul), does not partake of the fruit because He is in a
superior position, on account of His potency.
COMMENTARY
Just as a bird is separate from the tree he sits in, the spirit soul and the Supersoul
are distinct from the material body, which is compared to a tree. Because both of them
are  of  the  same  spiritual  quality,  they  are  naturally  related  as  friends.  While  residing
within the tree, one of them enjoys the fruit of that tree whereas the other one simply
witnesses his friend’s activities. This tree of material existence has its roots upwards and
its branches down, as described in the Bhagavad-gétä (15.1):
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
156 Chapter 5
çré-bhagavän uväca
ürdhva-mülam adhaù-çäkham açvatthaà prähur avyayam
chandäàsi yasya parëäni yas taà veda sa veda-vit
The  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  said:  It  is  said  that  there  is  an
imperishable  banyan  tree  that  has  its  roots  upward  and  its  branches  down  and
whose leaves are the Vedic hymns. One who knows this tree is the knower of the
Vedas.
Two birds live in this imperishable banyan tree. One of them is the living entity who
engages in eating the fruit of the tree, and the other is the Supersoul, who does not eat
the fruit but remains always self-satisfied. It is also stated in the Vedas:
dvä suparëä sayujä sakhäyä samänaà våkñaà pariñasvajäte
tayor anyaù pippalaà svädy atty anaçnann anyo ‘bhicäkaçéti
Two companion birds sit together in the shelter of the same pippala tree. One
of them is relishing the taste of the tree’s berries, while the other refrains from
eating and instead watches over His friend. (Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 4.6)
ätmänam anyaà ca sa veda vidvän apippalädo na tu pippalädaù
yo ‘vidyayä yuk sa tu nitya-baddho vidyä-mayo yaù sa tu nitya-muktaù
The Supersoul, who does not taste the fruit of the tree and who is the shelter of eternal
knowledge, knows all about Himself and the living entities. However, the living entity,
who tastes the fruit of the tree is ignorant of both himself and the Supreme Lord. The
living entity has been conditioned by the Lord’s illusory energy since time immemorial,
and the Supreme Lord, who is always in full knowledge, is eternally liberated.
COMMENTARY
The Supersoul knows Himself, as well as the living entities, and He does not eat the
bitter fruit of the tree of material existence. The conditioned living entity, on the other
hand, who tries to enjoy the fruits of his labor, neither knows himself nor the Supreme
Lord. These living entities are eternally conditioned whereas the Supersoul is eternally
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Symptoms of Conditioned and Liberated Living Entities
full of knowledge. The word vidyä in this verse refers to the internal spiritual knowledge
of the Supreme Lord, which is distinct from material knowledge. In the Gopäla-täpani
Upaniñad, it is stated:
There are two birds living as friends in the same tree—the living entity and
the  Supersoul.  The  living  entity  is  a  separated  part  and  parcel  of  the  Supreme
Lord and he enjoys the fruits of his fruitive actions. The Supersoul is a plenary
portion of the Supreme Lord, and He witnesses the actions of the living entity.
PURPORT
There  is  always  a  distinction  between  the  Supreme  Lord,  who  is  the  supreme
controller, and the living entities, who are His eternal servants. The Lord is the master
of all potencies and the living entities are subordinate to Him. The Lord does not enjoy
the fruits of karma, and He is omniscient. The living entity enjoys the fruits of his own
karma, and he is ignorant. Due to ignorance, the living entity has been conditioned since
time immemorial. If he reinstates himself as a servant of the Supreme Lord, then by the
influence of spiritual knowledge, he becomes eternally liberated. In his conditioned state
of existence, the living entity enjoys by acting piously and suffers by acting impiously. In
the liberated state of existence, there is no question of piety or impiety because one is
fully devoted to the Supreme Lord and is not attached to the fruits of his karma.
deha-stho ‘pi na deha-stho vidvän svapnäd yathotthitaù
adeha-stho ‘pi deha-sthaù kumatiù svapna-dåg yathä
A  liberated  soul,  although  living  within  the  material  body,  sees  himself  as  distinct
from the body, just as one who wakes up from a dream sees that it was not his real life.
An ignorant person, however, thinks the body to be the self, just as a dreaming person
takes what he sees to be his reality.
COMMENTARY
In the next nine verses, the Lord will explain the difference between the conditioned
souls  and  the  liberated  souls.  In  a  dream,  one  sees  oneself  in  an  imaginary  body,  but
upon  waking,  one  gives  up  all  identification  with  that  body.  Similarly,  one  who  has
awakened to Kåñëa consciousness no longer identifies with the gross or subtle material
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
158 Chapter 5
bodies, nor does he become affected by the happiness and distress of material life. On
the other hand, a foolish person does not awaken from the dream of material existence
and is afflicted with innumerable problems due to false identification with the gross and
subtle  material  bodies.  One  should  become  situated  in  one’s  eternal  spiritual  identity.
By properly identifying oneself as the eternal servant of Kåñëa, one becomes relieved of
his false material identity, and therefore the miseries of illusory existence immediately
cease, just as the anxiety of a troublesome dream ceases as soon as one awakens to his
normal, pleasant surroundings.
PURPORT
Although the subject matter of a dream may remain fresh in the mind of a person
when  he  wakes  up,  the  illusory  nature  of  the  dream  is  immediately  realized  by  him.
However, those who are sleeping in the lap of material nature cannot realize the illusory
nature of their existence until they awaken by means of self-realization. The seer himself
is eternal but his dreams at night and his experiences during the day are of no lasting
importance, being no better than a phantasmagoria.
indriyair indriyärtheñu guëair api guëeñu ca
gåhyamäëeñv ahaà kuryän na vidvän yas tv avikriyaù
A learned person who has seen the futility of material desires does not think that he
performs the activities of the body. Indeed, he knows that the activities of the body, which
amount to the senses contacting their objects, are going on automatically by the dictation
of the three modes of material nature.
COMMENTARY
One who is liberated from the bodily conception of life knows very well that he is
not the doer and that nothing belongs to him. However, there are persons who claim to
be transcendentally situated and yet are seen to be fully under the influence of material
desire.  Such  persons  are  nothing  more  than  cheaters  and  so  must  be  considered  the
lowest of mankind.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Symptoms of Conditioned and Liberated Living Entities
PURPORT
The material body always interacts with the sense objects because in order to survive,
the body must eat, drink, speak, sleep, and so on, but an enlightened person who knows
the science of Kåñëa consciousness never thinks, “These sense objects are my property.
They are meant for my pleasure.”
daivädhéne çarére ‘smin guëa-bhävyena karmaëä
vartamäno ‘budhas tatra kartäsméti nibadhyate
Under  the  control  of  his  previous  deeds,  a  foolish  person  accepts  a  material  body
and proudly considers himself the doer of all activities. Thus he becomes entangled in all
kinds of bodily affairs as the reactions to his fruitive activities that are actually carried
out by the three material qualities.
COMMENTARY
This material body is received as the result of one’s previous activities. While residing
in this body, one manipulates his senses and engages them in various activities. In this
way, he becomes entangled in the actions and reactions of work. How does it happen?
Because he is bewildered by false ego, the conditioned soul thinks himself to be the doer.
This is stated in the Bhagavad-gétä (3.27):
prakåteù kriyamäëäni guëaiù karmaëi sarvaçaù
ahaìkära-vimüòhätmä kartäham iti manyate
The spirit soul, bewildered by the influence of false ego, thinks himself the
doer of activities that are in actuality carried out by the three modes of material
nature.
PURPORT
Those who are bewildered by false ego foolishly claim to be the doers of all activities,
which  are  actually  carried  out  by  the  three  modes  of  material  nature.  Accepting  the
material  body  as  the  self,  they  think  that  they  are  working  independently,  although
their activities are fully under the control of material nature.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
160 Chapter 5
evaà viraktaù çayana äsanäöana-majjane
darçana-sparçana-ghräëa- bhojana-çravaëädiñu
na tathä badhyate vidvän tatra taträdayan guëän
Learned persons who are fixed in detachment engage their senses in activities such
as sleeping, sitting, traveling, bathing, seeing, touching, smelling, and hearing, but they
never become entangled. By simply remaining as a witness, they do not become entangled
like foolish people.
COMMENTARY
A  foolish  person,  as  a  result  of  his  attachment  for  material  objects,  enjoys  sense
gratification but then becomes entangled in material bondage. However, according to
the  logic  of  vädita  anuvåtti,  a  liberated  person  is  never  entangled,  even  if  he  seems
somewhat  connected  with  material  happiness  and  lamentation.  One  who  is  actually
detached from matter, even though he may accept material objects for the maintenance
of his body, remains aloof as the witness of his activities.
PURPORT
An intelligent and experienced person is never compelled to act under the influence
of the three modes of material nature. He remains detached from activities like sleeping,
sitting idly, and traveling, and is not forced to perform activities like looking, touching,
smelling, and eating.
TEXTS 12-13
prakåti-stho ‘py asaàsakto yathä khaà savitänilaù
vaiçäradyekñayäsaìga-çitayä chinna-saàçayaù
pratibuddha iva svapnän nänätväd vinivartate
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Symptoms of Conditioned and Liberated Living Entities
Although  everything  rests  in  space,  it  does  not  mix  with  anything,  the  sun  is  not
affected by the water in which its reflection appears, and the wind that blows everywhere
is not affected by the aromas it carries. Similarly, a self-realized soul is detached from the
material body and the world he lives in. He is like someone who has awakened from a
dream. With the sword of knowledge sharpened by detachment, the self-realized soul cuts
to pieces all doubts born of misidentification with matter, and thus withdraws his mind
from the temporary displays of Maya.
COMMENTARY
How is such detachment possible? The answer is provided here by giving the examples
of  space,  the  air,  and  the  sun.  One  who  has  cut-off  the  attachment  of  his  senses  for
their objects by utilizing the sharp weapon of renunciation, can remain aloof from the
material body and the material world.
PURPORT
A  self-realized  soul  is  freed  of  all  doubts  when  he  directly  experiences  his  eternal
spiritual  identity.  Lord  Kåñëa  is  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  and  nothing  is
separate  from  Him. Such an understanding frees one from all doubts.  As stated  here,
just like the sky, the sun, or the wind, one who is self-realized is not entangled, although
situated within the material creation of the Lord.
yasya syur véta-saìkalpäù präëendriya-mano-dhiyäm
våttayaù sa vinirmukto deha-stho ‘pi hi tad-guëaiù
A person is known to be actually liberated from the gross and subtle material bodies
when  all  the  functions  of  his  body  and  mind  are  performed  without  material  desires.
Although possessing a material body, such a person is not in bondage.
COMMENTARY
Uddhava had asked, “How does a liberated person live?” The answer is that although
the  material  body  and  mind  are  subject  to  lamentation,  illusion,  hunger,  lust,  greed,
insanity, frustration, and so on, one who remains active in this world without attachment
is considered vinirmukta, or completely liberated.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
162 Chapter 5
PURPORT
Those who have no material desires are not influenced by the three modes of material
nature,  even  though  they  are  situated  within  the  material  world.  Their  vital  energy,
senses,  mind,  and  intelligence  are  purified  when  engaged  in  the  devotional  service  of
Lord Kåñëa. Non-devotees are the servants of their material desires, whereas devotees
are the servants of the Supreme Lord.
yasyätmä hiàsyate hiàsrair yena kiïcid yadåcchayä
arcyate vä kvacit tatra na vyatikriyate budhaù
Sometimes, one may be tormented by a miscreant or attacked by a ferocious animal,
and  at  other  times,  one  may  be  shown  all  respect  and  worshiped.  One  who  does  not
become angry when attacked, or satisfied when worshiped, is certainly most intelligent.
COMMENTARY
What are the symptoms of a liberated soul? The answer is given here and the next
two verses. If one does not become angry when attacked for no apparent reason, and if
one does not become enlivened when glorified or worshiped, then one has passed the
test of self-realization and is considered fixed in spiritual intelligence. Yäjïavalkya has
said that when a person doesn’t become angry when pierced by sharp thorns, and doesn’t
become elated when shown great respect, he must be considered actually intelligent.
PURPORT
A person who is not affected, whether he is tortured or worshiped, is a liberated soul,
although living in this world.
na stuvéta na nindeta kurvataù sädhv asädhu vä
vadato guëa-doñäbhyäà varjitaù sama-dåì muniù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Symptoms of Conditioned and Liberated Living Entities
A  saintly  person  views  everyone  with  equal  vision,  and  so  he  is  not  affected  by
what ordinary person considers good or bad. Although he certainly sees how others are
performing beneficial or horrible work, and speaking intelligently or foolishly, he does not
wish to praise or criticize anyone.
COMMENTARY
A  liberated  soul  neither  blasphemes  nor  praises  people  who  are  engaged  on  the
material platform.
PURPORT
The equipoised sage who does not see material qualities and faults is liberated. He
therefore neither glorifies anyone nor blasphemes anyone.
na kuryän na vadet kiïcin na dhyäyet sädhv asädhu vä
ätmärämo ‘nayä våttyä vicarej jaòa-van muniù
For the sake of maintaining his body, a liberated soul does not act, speak, or think in
terms of material duality, considering something to be good and something else to be bad.
Rather, he is detached in all circumstances, taking pleasure in self-realization. Thus he
wanders about in his own mood, appearing like a dullard to outsiders.
COMMENTARY
A person who does not possess the above-mentioned qualities should be understood
to be a conditioned soul.
PURPORT
A  self-satisfied  devotee  of  the  Lord  does  not  divert  his  attention  to  observe  the
activities of materialists. Thinking how everything can be utilized in the service of the
Lord, he never views material objects as meant for his gratification. He has no conception
of good and bad because he sees how everything can be used for the satisfaction of the
Lord. To the external vision of ordinary people, however, he may appear to be acting on
the material platform.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
164 Chapter 5
çabda-brahmaëi niñëäto na niñëäyät pare yadi
çramas tasya çrama-phalo hy adhenum iva rakñataù
If, after thoroughly studying the Vedic literature one makes no endeavor to fix his
mind on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, then his endeavor is like that of a man
who works very hard to take care of a cow that gives no milk. In other words, the fruit
of one’s laborious study of Vedic knowledge is nothing more than the labor itself.
COMMENTARY
In this verse, the word pare indicates the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and not
the impersonal Brahman. It will be seen later on that Lord Kåñëa, the speaker of this
verse, repeatedly refers to Himself as the Supreme. An impersonal interpretation of this
verse would therefore be contradictory and illogical. If one’s aim is opposed to pleasing
the Lord, then all his endeavors are futile, just like the labor of a person who maintains
a barren cow.
PURPORT
The maintainer of a cow that does not give any milk does not receive any profit in
exchange for his service. Similarly, the endeavor of a person who has very strenuously
studied the Vedic literature will not prove fruitful if he has not concluded that he must
devote himself to the service of the Supreme Lord.
gäà dugdha-dohäm asatéà ca bhäryäà dehaà parädhénam asat-prajäà ca
vittaà tv atérthé-kåtam aìga väcaà hénäà mayä rakñati duùkha-duùkhé
My dear Uddhava, that person is certainly most miserable who maintains a cow that
gives no milk, an unchaste wife, a body that is completely dependent upon others, useless
children, and wealth not utilized for a good purpose. Similarly, one who makes a study of
the Vedic literature that is devoid of My glories is certainly most miserable.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Symptoms of Conditioned and Liberated Living Entities
COMMENTARY
One who is actually learned can appreciate that everything perceived through the
bodily senses are expansions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and that nothing
exists  independently  of  Him.  In  this  verse,  through  various  examples,  it  is  concluded
that the power of speech is useless if not engaged in glorifying the Supreme Lord. It is a
fact that in this world, a person labors uselessly while maintaining false hopes. There is
the example of the cow that gives no milk. When a cow no longer gives milk, one still
must work hard to protect her, because no one will purchase such a cow. The owner of
the cow may hope, “Perhaps she will again become pregnant and give some milk.” Then,
when this hope is smashed, the owner becomes indifferent to cow, and for this, he must
suffer in the next life, after going through so much trouble in this life.
Another example is that a man may discover that his wife doesn’t care for him any
more.  Still,  he  may  go  on  caring  for  such  a  useless  woman,  thinking,  “If  I  work  hard
and supply her everything she desires, she will surely love me in return.” Unfortunately,
such unchaste women generally do not change their attitude and so the husband simply
labors without any pleasing result.
Another  example  is that  one  who  has attained wealth  by  the  mercy  of  God  must
give  in  charity  to  the  deserving  persons  and  causes.  If  such  an  opportunity  presents
itself and one refused to give charity due to selfishness, one is considered a miser in this
life, and in the next life, he will be poverty-stricken.
PURPORT
One who maintains a cow that does not produce milk, an unchaste wife, a body that
is completely dependent upon others, sons that are not of good character, and wealth
that  is  not  used  for  good  purposes,  suffers  miseries,  as  do  those  who  do  not  hear  and
chant the glories of the Supreme Lord.
yasyäà na me pävanam aìga karma sthity-udbhava-präëa-nirodham asya
lélävatärepsita-janma vä syäd vandhyäà giraà täà bibhåyän na dhéraù
O Uddhava, an intelligent person should never read literature that does not describe
My  activities,  which  purify  the  entire  universe.  It  is  I  who  creates,  maintains,  and
annihilates the cosmic manifestation. Any so-called knowledge that does not recognize
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
166 Chapter 5
these activities of Mine is simply barren and is not acceptable to those who are actually
intelligent.
COMMENTARY
In  the  Vedic  literature,  the  Absolute  Truth  is  sometimes  described  as  Brahman,
sometimes as Paramätmä, and sometimes as Bhagavän. Just to clarify the actual purpose
of the Vedic literature, it is being said in this verse: “Those literatures that do not glorify
the  pastimes  of  My  various  incarnations,  which  are  beneficial  to  all  living  entities
throughout  the  universe,  are  to  be  avoided  by  saintly  persons.  Even  Vedic  statements
that  are  devoid  of  the  glorification  of  My  transcendental  pastimes,  should  never  be
studied by learned persons.”
PURPORT
In this verse the Lord explains that the literatures approved for the devotees are those
that glorify the Lord’s pastimes as the puruña-avatära and the lélävatäras, culminating
in the personal appearance of Lord Kåñëa Himself. Even Vedic literatures that neglect
the Supreme Personality of Godhead should be ignored. This fact was also explained by
Närada Muni to Çréla Vyäsadeva, the author of the Vedas, when the great Vedavyäsa felt
dissatisfied with his work.
evaà jijïäsayäpohya nänätva-bhramam ätmani
upärameta virajaà mano mayy arpya sarva-ge
After coming to this conclusion of knowledge, you should remove the misconception
that the material body is the self, and you should fix your mind upon Me, the all-pervading
Lord, and thereby free yourself from material existence.
COMMENTARY
The conclusion of knowledge is herein being described. To identify with one’s gross
and subtle bodies, to think that the innumerable living entities are ultimately one, and
to think that human beings and demigods possess different types of souls—these are all
misconceptions. One should give up such misconceptions by the process of devotional
service and fix his mind on the Supreme Lord. In this way, one will attain realization of
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Symptoms of Conditioned and Liberated Living Entities
the Personality of Godhead on the strength of his knowledge in devotional service. This
is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä (18.55):
bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù
tato mäà tattvato jïätvä viçate tad-anantaram
One  can  understand  Me  as  I  am,  as  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,
only by devotional service. And when one is in full consciousness of Me by such
devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God.
PURPORT
As long as one considers the body as the self, various misconceptions will pollute his
mentality. By full engagement in the devotional service of the Supreme Lord, one gains
respite  from  the  endeavors  for  sense  gratification,  being  resolute  in  his  determination
to use everything for the Lord’s satisfaction. The acceptance of anything as not being
related to the Lord and thus meant for one’s sense gratification, is the cause of material
bondage. One should therefore avoid this misconception by coming to the true conclusion
of knowledge, that the Supreme Lord is the sum total of everything.
yady anéço dhärayituà mano brahmaëi niçcalam
mayi sarväëi karmäëi nirapekñaù samäcara
My dear Uddhava, if you cannot detach your mind from the objects of the senses and
thus absorb it completely in Me, then offer the results of all your activities to Me, without
considering the fruits of your labor to be your personal property.
COMMENTARY
If  one  offers  the  results  of  all  activities  to  Lord  Kåñëa,  one  will  gradually  become
detached  from  the  false  egoistic  conception  of  life.  When  the  mind  becomes  purified
by  such  detachment,  transcendental  knowledge  becomes  manifest  within  the  heart.
When the mind remains absorbed in transcendental understanding, it can come to the
spiritual platform, as described in Bhagavad-gétä (18.54):
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
168 Chapter 5
brahma-bhütaù prasannätmä na çocati na känkñati
samaù sarveñu bhüteñu mad-bhaktià labhate paräm
One  who  is  thus  transcendentally  situated  at  once  realizes  the
Supreme Brahman. He never laments nor desires to have anything; he is equally
disposed  to  every  living  entity.  In  that  state  he  attains  pure  devotional  service
unto Me.
It is not difficult to understand the preliminary teachings of the Lord which stress
the distinction between matter and spirit—between the living entity and his material
body.  When  one  surpasses  the  stage  of  simple  self-realization  and  begins  meditation
upon  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  and  rendering  service  unto  Him,  he  can
enter  into  a  personal  relationship  with  the  Absolute  Truth.  Such  a  revival  of  one’s
dormant love for God dispels all traces of illusion whereby one thinks that this world
is  ultimate  reality.  By  experiencing  the  reality  of  one’s  relationship  with  the  Supreme
Lord, one automatically becomes detached from mundane society, friendship, and love.
Ultimately, such rendering of devotional service enables one to go back home, back to
Godhead and thus personally associate with the Lord.
The  simple  offering  of  the  results  of  one’s  activities  to  the  Lord  certainly  purifies
one’s  existence  and  enables  one  to  comprehend  the  preliminary  instructions  of  the
spiritual master in disciplic succession. Still, if one truly aspires to fix his mind in the
service of the Lord, then he should associate with pure devotees of the Lord and render
regulaged service in their association.
PURPORT
The conditioned soul, being in the bodily concept of life, is generally not inclined
to  offer  the  results  of  his  activities  to  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  Being
materially conditioned, he considers himself to belong to a particular family, society, and
nation instead of understanding himself to be the eternal servant of the Personality of
Godhead. The conditioned souls try to alleviate their suffering by exercising their minds
in speculating in various ways, but such endeavors will never free them from illusion. It
behooves one to begin offering the results of his activities for the service of the Lord, as
this will lead him to the proper understanding of his self.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Symptoms of Conditioned and Liberated Living Entities
çraddhälur mat-kathäù çåëvan su-bhadrä loka-pävanéù
gäyann anusmaran karma janma cäbhinayan muhuù
mad-arthe dharma-kämärthän äcaran mad-apäçrayaù
labhate niçcaläà bhaktià mayy uddhava sanätane
My  dear  Uddhava,  My  faithful  devotees  always  hear  about  and  glorify  My  all-
auspicious characteristics. They meditate on Me and enact My pastimes through dramatic
performances,  thus  taking  full  shelter  of  Me.  They  cultivate  religiosity,  economic
development, and sense gratification only in relation to Me, and in this way, attain pure
devotional service to Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
COMMENTARY
After  explaining  the  characteristics  of  jïäna-yoga,  Çré  Kåñëa  now  describes
the  characteristics  of  bhakti-yoga.  In  this  connection,  the  faithful  jïänés  have  been
separated from those who have no connection with Kåñëa consciousness. Because the
word  “faithful”  has  been  used  right  from  the  beginning  of  this  discussion,  it  is  to  be
understood that only a faithful person can come to the platform of devotional service.
When one regularly engages in hearing the glories of the Lord, while offering the results
of  his  activities  for  His  satisfaction,  one  can  attain  perfection  in  devotional  service.
Until one becomes actually detached from matter, one should continue to perform his
prescribed duties, offering the results in the devotional service of the Lord.
Lord  Kåñëa’s  pastimes  of  stealing  butter  from  the  elderly  gopés,  enjoying  life  with
His cowherd boyfriends and the young gopés, playing His flute and engaging in the räsa
dance, and so on, are all-auspicious spiritual activities. There are many authorized songs
and prayers glorifying these pastimes of the Lord, and by constantly chanting them one
will automatically be fixed in smaraëam, or remembrance of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. The Lord exhibited His opulences upon His birth in Kaàsa’s prison and at
the birth ceremony subsequently performed by Nanda Mahäräja in Gokula. The Lord
further performed many adventurous activities, such as chastising the serpent Käliya and
many other demons. One should regularly take part in the ceremonies commemorating
Kåñëa’s  pastimes,  such  as  the  Janmäñöamé  celebration  glorifying  the  Lord’s  birth.  On
such days one should worship the Deity of Lord Kåñëa and the spiritual master and thus
remember the Lord’s pastimes. One should give food grains and cloth to the brähmaëas
and  Vaiñëavas.  One  should  serve  the  Vaiñëavas  by  giving  them  mahäprasada,  flower
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
170 Chapter 5
garlands, sandalwood paste, and cloth. One who desires to accumulate wealth should do
so for the service of Lord Viñëu and the Vaiñëavas.
PURPORT
One who engages in hearing, glorifying, remembering and dramatically recreating
the  pastimes  of  the  Lord  will  soon  be  freed  from  all  material  desire.  One  may  take
pleasure  in  spiritual  festivals,  performances  of  particular  pastimes  of  Lord  Kåñëa,  or
activities of other devotees of the Lord. In this way, one can continually increase one’s
faith  in  the  Personality  of  Godhead.  Those  who  have  no  desire  to  hear,  glorify,  or
remember  the  transcendental  activities  of  the  Lord  are  certainly  materially  polluted
and never achieve the highest perfection. Such persons spoil the opportunity of human
life by devoting themselves to fleeting mundane topics that produce no eternal benefit.
The real meaning of religion is to constantly serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
whose form is eternal, full of bliss and knowledge. One who has taken full shelter of the
Lord  is  completely  uninterested  in  impersonal  speculations  about  the  nature  of  God.
He uses his time to advance more and more in the unlimited bliss of pure devotional
service.
sat-saìga-labdhayä bhaktyä mayi mäà sa upäsitä
sa vai me darçitaà sadbhir aïjasä vindate padam
One who has attained devotional service through the association of devotees always
engages in worshiping Me. As a result of his devotion, he easily attains My association in
My eternal abode in the spiritual sky, which was revealed to him by My devotees.
COMMENTARY
One may ask how such surrender or devotion is actually achieved. The Lord gives
the answer in this verse. One must live in a society of devotees. By such association, one
will be engaged twenty-four hours a day in the various processes of devotional service.
The  pure  devotees  of  the  Lord  can  reveal  the  spiritual  world  by  their  transcendental
sound  vibration,  making  it  possible  for  even  a  neophyte  devotee  to  experience  the
Lord’s abode. Being thus enlivened, the neophyte makes further progress and gradually
becomes qualified to personally serve the Personality of Godhead in the spiritual world.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Symptoms of Conditioned and Liberated Living Entities
By  constantly  associating  with  devotees  and  learning  from  them  about  devotional
science, one quickly achieves a deep attachment for the Lord and the Lord’s service, and
such attachment gradually matures into pure love of Godhead.
PURPORT
Materialists often challenge that the chanting of the holy names of the Lord is simply
a mundane activity. They therefore conclude that any kind of concocted mantra is as
good as chanting the holy names of the Lord. Just to establish the truth of the matter,
the Lord herein describes the genuine method for attaining His transcendental abode
in  the  spiritual  sky.  One  should  avoid  the  association  of  impersonalists,  who  preach
that  the  name  and  form  of  the  Lord  are  products  of  Maya,  or  illusion.  Actually,  the
impersonalists are envious of the devotees of the Lord and so they take every opportunity
to deride them, thus simply creating disturbances. It is only by hearing from the pure
devotees of the Lord that one can understand the truth about the Supreme Lord and
His eternal abode.
TEXTS 26-27
´Î3{H 3HÌ=
çré-uddhava uväca
sädhus tavottama-çloka mataù kédåg-vidhaù prabho
bhaktis tvayy upayujyeta kédåçé sadbhir ädåtä
etan me puruñädhyakña lokädhyakña jagat-prabho
praëatäyänuraktäya prapannäya ca kathyatäm
Çré Uddhava said: O Uttama-çloka! O Lord, who is glorified by select prayers, what
kind  of  person  do  You  accept  as  a  genuinely  saintly  person?  What  kind  of  devotional
service  is  approved  by  You  as  worthy  of  being  offered  to  Your  Lordship?  O  Lord  of
Vaikuëöha!  O  master  of  the  universe,  I  am  fully  surrendered  unto  You  and  have  no
shelter other than Your lotus feet. Kindly explain this to me.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
172 Chapter 5
COMMENTARY
The word puruñädhyakña in this verse indicates that Lord Kåñëa is the master not
only of all the demigods, but of the puruña-avatäras. The word lokädhyakña indicates
that  Lord  Kåñëa  is  the  master  of  Vaikuëöha.  Uddhava  also  addresses  Lord  Kåñëa  as
jagat-prabhu, because the Lord mercifully incarnates within the material world for the
purpose  of  delivering  the  pious  conditioned  souls.  The  word  praëatäya  indicates  that
Uddhava is a surrendered soul and not an impersonalist who refuses to bow down to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this verse, Uddhava says that he is anuraktäya, or
attached to Lord Kåñëa with love. Although some great devotees like Arjuna sometimes
worshiped the demigods, just to acknowledge their exalted positions within the universe,
Uddhava never adored anyone but the Supreme Lord.
tvaà brahma paramaà vyoma puruñaù prakåteù paraù
avatérno ‘si bhagavan svecchopätta-påthag-vapuù
My dear Lord, although You are transcendental to material nature, and like the sky,
You are never entangled in any way, You assume different forms of incarnation in this
world, according to the desires of Your devotees.
COMMENTARY
The  pure  devotees  of  the  Lord  are  interested  in  delivering  the  conditioned  souls
from their ignorance. As such, they are considered to be direct representatives of the
Lord and thus non-different from Him. Although the Lord is fully self-satisfied and thus
not  at  all  interested  in  the  affairs  of  this  material  world,  still,  by  His  causeless  mercy,
He sometimes incarnates just to propagate His devotional service for the benefit of the
ignorant conditioned souls.
Thus, it must be concluded that the Lord descends in various forms as incarnations
for  the  pleasure  of  His  devotees.  He  also  appears  as  the  Deity  so  that  His  devotees
can  render  service  unto  Him.  The  Lord  is  non-different  from  His  devotees  because
He  preaches  devotional  service  through  His  devotees.  This  has  been  expressed  by  Çré
Närada:  “Having  been  awarded  a  transcendental  body  befitting  an  associate  of  the
Personality  of  Godhead,  I  quit  the  body  made  of  five  material  elements.”  Thus,  the
devotees  are  considered  to  be  non-different  from  the  Lord.  The  Lord  is  self-satisfied,
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Symptoms of Conditioned and Liberated Living Entities
and so is indifferent to this material world, and yet He incarnates to preach devotional
service  to  Himself.  By  His  own  sweet  will,  He  assumes  various  forms,  such  as  Kapila,
Dattätreya, and Närada. Thus it is seen that although the Lord is one, He assumes many
transcendental forms.
PURPORT
Uddhava  said,  “O  Lord!  You  are  the  Supreme  Brahman,  the  transcendental
Personality of Godhead, the Lord of Vaikuëöha. You have personally manifested in this
world,  by  Your  own  sweet  will.  You  have  assumed  innumerable  forms  of  incarnation
and  now  You  have  appeared  in  Your  eternal  two-armed  form  of  Muralidhara,  which
is  independent  of  Your  features  of  Brahman,  Paramätmä,  and  four-armed  Lord
Näräyaëa. You have directly descended to this world from Your eternal abode, Goloka
Våndävana.”
After reading this verse, unscrupulous people may think that Kåñëa appeared in this
form before Uddhava as a manifestation of Brahman, or as an expansion of Paramätmä.
The devotees eternally serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the spiritual world
in forms of full consciousness and bliss.
TEXTS 29-32
çré-bhagavän uväca
kåpälur akåta-drohas titikñuù sarva-dehinäm
satya-säro ‘navadyätmä samaù sarvopakärakaù
kämair ahata-dhér dänto måduù çucir akiïcanaù
aného mita-bhuk çäntaù sthiro mac-charaëo muniù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
174 Chapter 5
apramatto gabhérätmä dhåtimäï jita-ñaò-guëaù
amäné mäna-daù kalyo maitraù käruëikaù kaviù
äjïäyaivaà guëän doñän mayädiñöän api svakän
dharmän santyajya yaù sarvän mäà bhajeta sa tu sattamaù
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O Uddhava, a saintly person is merciful
and so is never inclined to give pain to others. Even if others are aggressive, he is tolerant
and forgiving towards all. His purpose in life comes from the truth itself, he is free from
envy, and his mind is equipoised in happiness and distress. He dedicates his time to work
for  the  welfare  of  others.  His  intelligence  is  never  bewildered  by  material  desires,  and
he  has  learned  to  control  his  senses.  His  behavior  is  always  pleasing,  never  harsh  and
always exemplary, and he is free from possessiveness. He never endeavors like ordinary
worldly people, and he strictly controls his eating and so he always remains peaceful and
steady. A saintly person is thoughtful and accepts Me as his only shelter. Such a person
is very cautious in the execution of his duties and is not disturbed even in a distressing
situation. He has conquered over the six material qualities—hunger, thirst, lamentation,
illusion, old age, and death. He is free from all desire for prestige, and he offers respect to
others. He is expert in reviving the Kåñëa consciousness of others and so he never cheats
anyone.  Rather,  he  is  a  well-wishing  friend  to  all,  being  most  merciful.  Such  a  saintly
person must be considered the most learned of men. He perfectly understands that the
ordinary religious duties prescribed by Me in various Vedic scriptures possess favorable
qualities that purify the performer, and he knows that neglect of such duties constitutes
a  discrepancy  in  one’s  life.  Having  taken  complete  shelter  at  My  lotus  feet,  however,  a
saintly person ultimately renounces such ordinary religious duties and worships Me alone.
He is thus considered to be the best among all living entities.
COMMENTARY
The  Supreme  Lord  says  that  there  are  two  types  of  saintly  persons.  Those  who
perform  devotional  service  mixed  with  karma,  or  jïäna,  and  those  who  engage  in
unalloyed devotional service. The first class of saintly persons is described in the first
three verses. The word kåpälu indicates that one is not able to tolerate others’ distress.
Akåta-droha indicates that a devotee does not wish misery even for his enemy. Titikñu
means that he tolerates others’ neglect, and forgives the offenses committed against him.
Satya-sära  indicates  that  a  devotee  is  always  fixed  in  the  truth.  Anavadyätmä  means
that a  pure  devotee is devoid of envy, and never unnecessarily criticizes others.  Sama
means that he is equal in both happiness and distress, as well as in honor and dishonor.
Sarvopakäraka  means  that  a  devotee  is  always  engaged  in  acts  meant  for  the  welfare
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Symptoms of Conditioned and Liberated Living Entities
of  others.  Kämair  ahata-dhé  indicates  that  a  devotee  is  not  agitated  by  lusty  desires
because,  dänta,  his  senses  are  completely  under  control.  Mådu  means  that  his  heart
is gentle, and çuci means that he is pure, and always careful to observe the prescribed
etiquette. The word akiïcana indicates that a devotee doesn’t claim anything as his own
because He knows that everything belongs to the Lord. The word aniha means detached
from all worldly activities. Mitabhuk refers to a person who eats pure and simple food,
and  just  enough  to  maintain  a  healthy  condition  of  the  body.  Sänta  means  peaceful
in  mind.  Sthira  means  to  remain  fixed  in  one’s  occupational  duties  and  devotional
activities. Mat-çaraëa indicates that the devotee has taken complete shelter at the lotus
feet of Çré Kåñëa. Muni refers to a thoughtful man. Apramatta means cautious, and not
mad. Gabhirätmä means he whose nature is unfathomable. Dhåtimäna means one is not
agitated by the urges of the tongue and genitals. Amäni means devoid of the desire for
respect. Mänada means to give respect to others. Kalya means that the devotee is expert
in preaching  to others.  Maitra indicates that by his missionary activities, a devotee  is
friendly  to  everyone.  Käruëika  means  that  a  devotee  mercifully  tries  to  bring  people
to  a  sane  condition  of  life.  Kavi  indicates  that  a  devotee  performs  all  of  his  activities
expertly. These are the twenty-eight qualities of a pure devotee.
A pure devotee who possesses the above-mentioned qualities is understood to have
attained  the  perfection  of  life.  He  no  longer  has  any  desire  for  liberation  by  merging
into the existence of the Lord. In the beginning, one cultivates devotional service mixed
with karma, and then one progresses to the practice of devotional service mixed with
jïäna. The stage of perfection, however, is characterized as being devoid of karma and
jïäna. This is the meaning of pure devotional service. One who is thus situated on the
transcendental platform is called ätmäräma, or çänta-bhakta,
In the Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu (3.1.34) it is said: “In this Dvärakä-dhäma, I am being
attracted  by  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Kåñëa,  who  is  personified  spiritual
bliss.  Simply  by  seeing Him, I am feeling great happiness. Oh, I  have wasted so much
time trying to become self-realized through impersonal cultivation. This is a cause for
lamentation!”
Çréla Sukadeva Gosvämé has said, “Being attracted by the qualities of Çré Hari, I had
heard Çrémad Bhägavatam from my father.”
The  cultivation  of  knowledge  is  neglected  by  those  engaged  in  the  process  of
devotional  service.  In  the  Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu  (1.1.11)  it  is  further  stated:  “
One
should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord Kåñëa favorably and
without  desire  for  material  profit  or  gain  through  fruitive  activities  or  philosophical
speculation. That is called pure devotional service.”
3  anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam
änukülyena kåñëänu- çélanaà bhaktir uttamä
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
176 Chapter 5
As  indicated  in  verse  thirty-two,  a  pure  devotee  of  the  Lord  is  fully  aware  of  the
pious advantages of executing duties within the varëäçrama system, and he is similarly
aware  of  the  harmful  mistake  of  neglecting  such  duties.  Still,  having  full  faith  in  the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  a  devotee  gives  up  all  ordinary  social  and  religious
activities  and  engages  fully  in  devotional  service.  He  knows  that  Lord  Kåñëa  is  the
ultimate  source  of  everything  and  that  all  perfection  comes  from  Lord  Kåñëa  alone.
Because of his extraordinary faith, the devotee is called sattama, or the best among all
living beings.
In the Çrémad Bhägavatam (5.18.12) it is said:
yasyästi bhaktir bhagavaty akiïcanä sarvair guëais tatra samäsate suräù
haräv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guëä mano-rathenäsati dhävato bahiù
One who has unflinching devotion for the Personality of Godhead has all the
good qualities of the demigods. But one who is not a devotee of the Lord has only
material qualifications that are of little value. This is because he is hovering on
the mental plane and is certain to be attracted by the glaring material energy.
PURPORT
In the first three verses, the twenty-eight qualities of a pure devotee are described.
Among them, the seventeenth quality, kåñëaika çaraëa is the most important, and the
other twenty-seven are secondary.
1.  Kåpälu.  A  devotee  cannot  tolerate  seeing  the  world  merged  in  ignorance  and
suffering  the  whiplashes  of  Maya.  Therefore  he  busily  engages  in  distributing  Kåñëa
consciousness and is called kåpälu, or merciful.
2. Akåta-droha.  Even if someone tries to harm a devotee, he does not try to retaliate.
Indeed, he never tries to harm any living entity. The Mäyävädés, on the other hand,
are  most  envious  and  thus  try  to  kill  God,  as  well  as  the  individuality  of  the  living
entities. Thus, the impersonalists are their own worst enemies, and they are certainly
the enemies of their unfortunate followers. Fruitive workers are also envious of their
self because they purposely absorb themselves in material affairs so that they do not
have the chance to understand their eternal existence. In this world of survival of the
fittest,  everyone  is  engaged  in  exploiting  others.  It  is  only  the  devotees  of  the  Lord
who uses his body, mind, and words, not only for his own benefit, but for the welfare
of others.
3.    Titikñu.  A  devotee  tolerates  the  offenses  of  others.  He  is  detached  from  the
material body, which is composed of skin, bones, blood, pus, urine, and so on, and so he
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Symptoms of Conditioned and Liberated Living Entities
forgives the obnoxious behavior of those who cannot appreciate the value of a devotee
of the Lord.
4.  Satyaniñöha. A devotee always remains fixed in the truth. He knows very well
that he is the eternal servant of the Lord and thus does not waste his time by engaging
in useless, material activities.
5.    Asüyä.  A  devotee  is  never  envious.  He  knows  that  this  world  is  a  kind  of
phantasmagoria and so he never envies someone in any material condition. Therefore,
he never unnecessarily criticizes others or causes any kind of disturbance.
6.  Samadarçé. A devotee has equal vision. His goal is to attain the eternal Supreme
Personality of Godhead and so he is not elated or disturbed by the temporary happy or
miserable conditions of this world. For him, all temporary material conditions are the
same.
7.   Sarvopokäraka. The devotee is a benefactor of all living entities. Neglecting one’s
own  interest  and  working  for  the  satisfaction  of  others  is  called  paropakära,  whereas
causing trouble to others for one’s personal gratification is called paräpakära. A devotee
always  works  for  the  satisfaction  of  Lord  Kåñëa,  who  is  the  maintainer  of  all  living
entities, and so his activities are ultimately pleasing to everyone. Devotional service to
Lord Kåñëa is the perfectional stage of welfare work because Lord Kåñëa is the supreme
controller of everyone’s happiness and distress. Foolish persons, under the influence of
false egotism, considering themselves to be the benefactors of others, perform materialistic
welfare work rather than attending to the eternal happiness of others. Because a devotee
remains pure and engages in missionary activities, he is everyone’s best friend.
8.    Väsanä-varjita-vicäraparäyaëa.  A  devotee  has  no  material  desires.  Those  who
have given up the service of Kåñëa maintain a desire to become the master of all they
survey.  Thus,  the  conditioned  soul  is  busily  engaged  in  trying  to  lord  it  over  material
nature,  although  the  Lord  Himself  is  the  actual  enjoyer.  Ordinary  persons  see  all
material  things  as  objects  for  their  personal  gratification  and  thus  try  to  acquire  or
control them. Ultimately a man wants to possess a woman and enjoy sex gratification
with her. The Supreme Lord supplies the desired fuel that causes the fire of lust to burn
painfully in one’s heart, but the Lord does not give self-realization to such a misguided
person.  A  liberated  devotee,  who  is  fully  surrendered  to  Lord  Kåñëa,  enjoys  a  blissful
life of devotional service and never becomes tempted by the seductions of the external
world. The devotee does not follow the example of the foolish deer, who is attracted by
the hunter’s sweet music and then killed. He does not become attached to sumptuous
eating, nor does he spend the whole day making arrangements for bodily comfort. A fully
surrendered soul, who is devoted to the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who  is  the  only  enjoyer,  never  sacrifices  his  auspicious  position  of  steady  intelligence,
even in the face of so-called material opportunity.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
178 Chapter 5
9.  Dänta. A devotee is naturally repelled by sinful activities and controls his senses
by dedicating all his acts to Kåñëa.
10. Mrdu. A devotee is gentle. Conditioned souls invariably consider others as friends
or enemies, and they justify cruel behavior meted out to their opponents.   A devotee
never  considers  others  as  his  enemies  and  so  never  indulges  in  the  tendency  to  take
pleasure in the suffering of others.
11.    Çuci.  A  devotee  is  pure,  both  internally  and  externally  because  impurity  and
abomination  cannot  touch  him.  Simply  by  remembering  such  a  pure  devotee,  one  is
freed from the tendency to sin. Because of his perfect behavior, a devotee is called çuci,
or pure.
12.  Akiïcana.  A  devotee  is  free  from  possessiveness.  He  is  not  eager  to  enjoy  or
renounce anything because he considers everything to be Lord Kåñëa’s property. One
who is akiïcana has no desire for religiosity, economic development, sense gratification,
or liberation because he has no hankering for material enjoyment or renunciation.
13. Anéha. A devotee is indifferent to material acquisitions because he sees everything
in relation to the Lord.
14.  Mitabhuk. A devotee eats only as much as is required to maintain his health.
Indeed,  he  accepts  all  types  of  material  enjoyment  only  as  much  as  is  required.  He  is
not feverishly attached to sense gratification, like the materialists. When necessary, a
devotee can give up anything for Lord Kåñëa’s service, but he does not accept or reject
anything for his personal prestige.
15. Çänta. A devotee is peaceful because he abstains from material enjoyment, which
is full of disturbances. He is indifferent to material enjoyment because he is constantly
engaged  in  the  Lord’s  service.  Peaceful  does  not  mean  inactive.  Because  a  devotee  is
active in service to the Lord, material enjoyers may wrongly consider him to be restless,
just like themselves.
16.  Sthira.  A  devotee  is  fixed  in  his  determination,  and  is  not  restless.  He  is  not
situated on the platform of fearfulness because of material absorption.
17. Çaraëägata. A devotee is fully surrendered to the Lord. A devotee does not take
pleasure  in  anything  except  serving  Lord  Kåñëa,  and  so  he  is  always  attentive  while
executing his duties in devotional service.
18. Muni. A devotee is thoughtful and intelligent, and so he is not distracted from
his path of spiritual advancement.
19. Apramatta. A devotee is without inebriation. Conditioned souls are more or less
crazy but the devotee is sane, due to his being situated in his natural, or constitutional
position.
20.  Gambhérätmä.  A  devotee  is  grave.  Being  absorbed  in  the  Absolute  Truth,  his
mentality cannot be understood by gross materialists.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Symptoms of Conditioned and Liberated Living Entities
21.  Dhåtimän.  A  devotee  is  firm  and  steady  in  his  determination  because  he  has
fully controlled his tongue and genitals. In other words, he fully possesses the power of
discrimination and does not irrationally change his position.
22. Jita-ñaò-guëa. A devotee has conquered the six material qualities-hunger, thirst,
illusion, death, fear, and lamentation.
23. Amäné. A devotee is not proud. Even if he is famous, he does not take it very
seriously.
24.  Mänada.  A  devotee  is  not  one  to  brag  about  himself,  under  the  influence  of
passion and ignorance. Rather, he offers all respects to others, since everyone is part and
parcel of Lord Kåñëa.
25. Kalya, or dakña. A devotee is expert in making people understand the truth of
Kåñëa consciousness.
26.  Maitra.  A  devotee  is  a  kind  friend  to  everyone  because  he  preaches  Kåñëa
consciousness, and never encourages them on the bodily platform.
27. Käruëika. A devotee is most merciful because he tries to bring everyone to the
platform of sanity, or Kåñëa consciousness.
28.  Kavi.  A  devotee  is  poetic  and  very  learned.  He  is  expert  in  studying  the
transcendental qualities of Lord Kåñëa and is able to show the harmony and compatibility
of the Lord’s apparently contradictory qualities. This is possible through expert knowledge
of the absolute nature of the Lord.
One who fully engages in the unalloyed devotional service of the Lord is expected
to  develop  all  of  these  transcendental  qualities.  In  the  beginning,  the  devotee  should
cultivate the limbs of devotional service while continuing to perform the duties of his
occupation according to the rules prescribed in the scriptures. As the devotee becomes
fixed  in  devotional  service  and  freed  from  material  desires,  he  can  give  up  these
regulations so that he can intensify his engagement on the spiritual platform. Thus he
will gradually become a genuinely saintly person. Kåñëa consciousness has nothing to do
with material enjoyment and renunciation. The conceptions that, “I am the enjoyer,” and
“I have renounced something,” only apply to those who are in the bodily conception of
life. The devotee thinks, “Nothing is mine because everything is owned and controlled
by the Lord.”
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
180 Chapter 5
jïätväjïätvätha ye vai mäà yävän yaç cäsmi yädåçaù
bhajanty ananya-bhävena te me bhaktatamä matäù
My devotees may or may not understand Me in truth, how I am situated beyond the
cosmic manifestation, but if they possess unalloyed devotion for Me, I consider them to
be great personalities.
COMMENTARY
In  this  verse,  the  word  yävän  is  used  to  indicate  that  Lord  Kåñëa  is  unlimited,
beyond the jurisdiction of material existence. Still, He is captivated by the love of His
pure  devotees.  it  is  said  that  Lord  Kåñëa  never  leaves  Våndävana,  because  of  the  love
of  the  cowherd  men  and  women.  The  word  yaù  is  used  to  indicate  that  the  Absolute
Truth appears as the son of Vasudeva. Yädåça indicates that the Lord is completely self-
satisfied, and äpta-käma means, “one who has nothing to gain from anyone else.” Still,
being captivated by the love of His devotees, the Lord sometimes appears to be dependent
on  them,  needing  them  to  fulfill  His  desires.  Actually,  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead is always independent, but He reciprocates the love of His devotees and thus
seems to be dependent upon them. For example, Lord Kåñëa appeared to be completely
dependent  upon  Nanda  Mahäräja  and  mother  Yaçodä  as  a  child  in  Våndävana.  The
word ajïätvä means “ignorant” and it indicates that sometimes a devotee may seem to
be philosophically naive and bereft of a proper understanding of the Lord.
PURPORT
Although  a  materialist  or  impersonalist  may  appear  to  be  very  highly  qualified,
without  Kåñëa  consciousness,  such  a  person  will  never  attain  the  success  of  life.  One
must understand the personal feature of the Absolute Truth and surrender unto Him.
Even if one is not very intelligent, if he simply accepts that he is the eternal servant of
the Lord, he will certainly attain perfection. The residents of Våndävana had no idea or
didn’t understand that Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They simply loved
Kåñëa as their most beloved and it is for this reason that they are considered perfect.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Symptoms of Conditioned and Liberated Living Entities
TEXTS 34-41
mal-liìga-mad-bhakta-jana-darçana-sparçanärcanam
paricaryä stutiù prahva-guëa-karmänukértanam
mat-kathä-çravaëe çraddhä mad-anudhyänam uddhava
sarva-läbhopaharaëaà däsyenätma-nivedanam
maj-janma-karma-kathanaà mama parvänumodanam
géta-täëòava-väditra- goñöhébhir mad-gåhotsavaù
yäträ bali-vidhänaà ca sarva-värñika-parvasu
vaidiké täntriké dékñä madéya-vrata-dhäraëam
mamärcä-sthäpane çraddhä svataù saàhatya codyamaù
udyänopavanäkréòa- pura-mandira-karmaëi
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
182 Chapter 5
sammärjanopalepäbhyäà seka-maëòala-vartanaiù
gåha-çuçrüñaëaà mahyaà däsa-vad yad amäyayä
amänitvam adambhitvaà kåtasyäparikértanam
api dépävalokaà me nopayuïjyän niveditam
yad yad iñöatamaà loke yac cäti-priyam ätmanaù
tat tan nivedayen mahyaà tad änantyäya kalpate
My dear Uddhava, one will be able to give up false pride by cultivating these limbs of
devotional service. One should purify himself by seeing, touching, worshiping, serving,
and  offering  prayers  of  glorification  and  obeisances  to  My  form  as  the  Deity,  as  well
as to My pure devotees. One should hear My glories in the association of devotees and
meditate upon Me. One should offer whatever he happens to possess to Me, considering
himself  to  be  My  eternal  servant.  In  this  way,  one  should  surrender  unto  Me.  One
should  make  arrangements  for  the  celebration  of  festivals  in  relation  to  Me.  These
festivals should be celebrated in the temple with singing and dancing in ecstasy. One
should, in the association of devotees, visit the holy places of pilgrimage that are related
to Me and observe the vows meant for devotees, such as Ekädaçé. One should receive
initiation from a bona fide spiritual master and if able to do so, give donations for the
construction  of  My  temples.  Most  importantly,  one  should  always  consider  himself
to be My humble servant, and thus engage for My satisfaction without duplicity. As
a  menial  servant,  one  should  sweep  the  floor  of  the  temple  and  then  cleanse  it  with
water and cow dung. When the floor is dry, one should sprinkle scented water over it
and then draw auspicious mandalas. A devotee should not become proud, advertising
himself as an exalted soul. If one offers to Me that which is most dear to him, that will
please Me greatly and thus advance him on the path toward eternal life.
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Lord said, “O Uddhava, you had asked Me to describe what kind of
devotional service is pleasing to Me. Here is the answer—you should offer respect and
worship to My deity form and to My devotees. You should offer all your possessions for
My service, thinking that ‘everything I have has been given to me by the Lord for use
in His service.’ With this attitude, one should offer to the Deity whatever he has at his
disposal.  One  should  surrender  one’s  body  and  very  self  at  the  lotus  feet  of  the  Lord.
One should glorify the Lord’s transcendental birth and activities, and sing His glories in
the association of devotees. One should observe My festivals, such as Janmäñöamé, with
singing, dancing, and the playing of musical instruments. One should arrange for very
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Symptoms of Conditioned and Liberated Living Entities
opulent worship of the Lord by offering new clothes, ornaments, sweets, flower garlands,
sandalwood paste, and so on, during festivals such as Holi.
One should observe religious vows like Ekädaçé, worship the Deity, and one should
arrange flower gardens, individually or collectively, for My service. One should arrange
a place for enacting the pastimes of the Lord. One should sweep the temple of the Lord
and then smear it with cow dung mixed with water. Thereafter, when the temple room
is  dry,  one  should  sprinkle  scented  water  and  then  decorate  the  floor  with  auspicious
drawings.  In  this  way,  one  should  engage  in  My  temple  as  a  menial  servant.  Just  as  a
servant of the king works for his satisfaction, one should engage in My service, giving
up all sense of miserliness. One should give up the desire for personal aggrandizement.
One should not use a ghee lamp that has been offered to Me for his own use, such as to
illuminate his own room. One should only partake of that food which was first offered
to Me. As dictated by etiquette, one should distribute the remnants of My food to the
Vaiñëavas, and then honor the prasäda oneself. It is stated in the çästra that the merit
one obtains by fasting for six months can be attained in Kali-yuga simply by partaking
of one morsel of Lord Viñëu’s remnants. One should meditate upon My form within his
heart, chant My holy names, accept the remnants of My food, drink the water that has
washed My feet, and touch the remnants of My flowers to one’s head. One who follows
all  these  principles  is  to  be  considered  as  on  the  same  platform  as  the  infallible  Lord
Viñëu. One should offer to Me the thing that is most dear to him in this world. However,
although  wine  is  very  dear  to  Lord  Baladeva,  it  should  never  be  offered  to  the  Deity
because there is no mention of such a practice in the çästra. Among all these practices,
the most effective is the offering of one’s most dear thing for the service of the Lord.
PURPORT
Pure devotees never consider the things of this world to be meant for their personal
enjoyment,  without  connection  to  Kåñëa  consciousness.  Pure  devotees  consider
themselves  the  eternal  servants  of  the  Lord,  and  never  make  false  claims  of  being
themselves  the  Lord.  Knowing  the  pure  devotee  to  be  the  Lord’s  representative,  sent
into this world by His mercy, fortunate people touch his feet, have his darçana, worship
him, serve him, glorify him, offer obeisances to him, and appreciate his transcendental
qualities.
One should not consider the Deity, the Lord in the heart, and the pure devotees of
the Lord to be separate from one another. One should know that the Absolute Truth
is  one,  while  manifesting  in  infinite  varieties.  One  should  faithfully  hear  about  the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  from  the  spiritual  master,  while  fully  surrendering
unto the Lord, offering all of one’s possessions to Him in His service. Indeed, one should
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
184 Chapter 5
consider  his  very  self  as  being  meant  for  the  pleasure  of  the  Lord  and  for  no  other
purpose.
The word varña refers to a period of time, as well as a tract of land. Yäträ refers to
the performance of religious celebrations current at various places and at various times.
The  performance  of  worship  is  called  balividhäna.  There  are  two  kinds  of  initiation,
Vedic initiation and initiation conducted in pursuance of the Vedic literature. The word
dikñä indicates that one should be very eager to cultivate Kåñëa consciousness. The word
hariväsara refers to the appearance day of the Lord, which should be nicely celebrated
by all Vaiñëavas. The firm determination to engage in the Lord’s service is indicated by
the word vratadharaëa.
Impersonalists do not accept the supremacy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
One  should  give  up  the  association  of  such  persons  and  work,  either  individually  or
collectively,  to  make  flower  gardens  and  fruit  orchards  for  the  service  of  the  Deity,
äçramas for the residence of devotees, and temples so that people in general can take
part in the worship of the Lord. Giving up all false pride, one should sweep the floor
of the Lord’s temple, smear it with cow dung, sprinkle it with scented water, and then
draw auspicious symbols, engaging just like a menial servant. One should never make
such endeavors simply to enhance his prestige. One should never consider himself to be
a great devotee, and one should never brag about his devotional activities. One should
not  employ  a  lamp  that  was  offered  to  the  Lord  for  serving  his  own  purpose,  such  as
illuminating his residence. One should never offer to the Lord something that was given
to someone else, or used by him.
Being impelled by material desires, one should not utilize what is dear to him for his
personal sense gratification. Rather, he should offer his favorite things for the service
of  the  Supreme  Lord.  By  doing  so,  one  will  attain  eternal  benefit.  One  should  not
become bewildered by thoughts of material enjoyment and thus forget the service of the
Supreme Lord. All of one’s wealth and family members should be engaged for the Lord’s
satisfaction and this will save one from increasing his material bondage.
süryo ‘gnir brähmaëä gävo vaiñëavaù khaà maruj jalam
bhür ätmä sarva-bhütäni bhadra püjä-padäni me
O gentle one, you may worship Me in the sun, fire, brähmaëas, cows, Vaiñëavas, sky,
wind, water, earth, individual soul, and all living entities.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Symptoms of Conditioned and Liberated Living Entities
COMMENTARY
Uddhava had asked, “Where should I worship You? The Lord herein replies, “There
are eleven places where you can worship Me, such as the sun, fire and so on.”
TEXTS 43-45
sürye tu vidyayä trayyä haviñägnau yajeta mäm
ätithyena tu viprägrye goñv aìga yavasädinä
vaiñëave bandhu-sat-kåtyä hådi khe dhyäna-niñöhayä
väyau mukhya-dhiyä toye dravyais toya-puraùsaraiù
sthaëòile mantra-hådayair bhogair ätmänam ätmani
kñetra-jïaà sarva-bhüteñu samatvena yajeta mäm
My dear Uddhava, one should worship Me within the sun by chanting the Puruña-
sükta mantras, by perfoming worship, and offering obeisances. One should worship Me
within fire with oblations of ghee, and one should worship the brähmaëas as representing
Me by respectfully honoring them as guests. One should worship Me within the cows by
offerings them grass and grains. One should worship the Vaiñëavas as being non-different
from Me by showing them love and respect. I should be worshiped within the heart by
meditation,  and  I  should  be  worshiped  within  the  air  by  the  practice  of präëäyama.  I
should be worshiped within water by offerings of water and other paraphernalia, and I
should be worshiped within the earth by the chanting of mantras. One should worship
Me within all living entities by seeing the Supersoul present within everyone, thus seeing
with equal vision.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
186 Chapter 5
COMMENTARY
How should I adore My worshipable Lord in all these manifestations? The answer is
given in these three verses.
PURPORT
It  is  not  possible  to  understand  the  transcendental  Lord  simply  by  accumulating
knowledge with the help of materially conditioned senses. Considering this, one should
not think of the sun, fire, the brähmaëas, cows, Vaiñëavas, the sky, air, water, the earth,
and the individual spirit souls as devoid of any relation with the Absolute Truth, and
thus  to  be  avoided.  Rather,  one  should  accept  all  these  entities  as  being  favorable  for
the execution of one’s devotional service. As soon as one sees anything as separate from
the  Lord’s  service,  one  will  certainly  neglect  it.  These  entities  should  be  accepted  as
worshipable because of their relationship with the Lord.
The things mentioned in these verses are to be worshiped in various manners. By the
hymns of Åk, Säma, and Yajur Vedas, one should worship the sun. By offering ghee into
the sacred fire, Agni is worshiped. By receiving them as honored guests, the brähmaëas
are worshiped. By feeding them nice grass, the cows are worshiped. By following his orders
and  thinking  of  him  as  an  instructor  and  an  eternal  friend,  a  Vaiñëava  is  worshiped.
By constant meditation, the Lord within the heart is worshiped. The air is worshiped
by  considering  the  life-air  to  be  the  most  important  element.  Water  is  worshiped  by
offerings of water and flowers. The earth is worshiped by performing the nyäsa mantras.
The  Supersoul  is  worshiped  by  offering  Him  one’s  dearest  possessions,  and  all  living
entities are worshiped by treating them with equal vision.
dhiñëyeñv ity eñu mad-rüpaà çaìkha-cakra-gadämbujaiù
yuktaà catur-bhujaà çäntaà dhyäyann arcet samähitaù
In this way, you should worship My transcendental four-armed form, holding a conch,
disc, club, and lotus, with fixed attention.
COMMENTARY
One  should  worship  the  Supreme  Lord  with  a  controlled  mind,  as  being  present
in  these  entities.  This  worship  is  actually  the  worship  of  Lord  Näräyaëa,  although  it
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Symptoms of Conditioned and Liberated Living Entities
appears to be the worship of many separate entities. The worshipers of Çré Rämacandra
should also meditate on their worshipable Lord and offer worship as prescribed herein.
PURPORT
By worshiping all these as if they were independent entities, one will be considered
a pantheist, or one who worships many gods. One should meditate on the form of Lord
Näräyaëa, who holds a conch, disc, club, and lotus in His hands, as being situated within
all these entities. In this way, the worship of all these entities will be in relation to Lord
Hari.
iñöä-pürtena mäm evaà yo yajeta samähitaù
labhate mayi sad-bhaktià mat-småtiù sädhu-sevayä
One  who  worships  Me  in  full  concentration  by  performing  sacrifices  and  activities
meant  for  the  welfare  of  others,  attains  unflinching  devotional  service  unto  Me.  By
rendering service to saintly persons, he achieves realized knowledge of Me.
COMMENTARY
An  advanced  devotee  performs  his  service  meticulously  because  it  is  his  very  life
and soul. His austerities are never artificial because he keeps his body healthy so that he
can properly execute his service to his spiritual master and the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
The congregational chanting of the holy names of the Lord and the worship of the
spiritual master are the best means for rising to the platform of pure devotional service.
It is far better to chant the holy name of the Lord in the association of sincere devotees
than to simply practice some form of dry renunciation or fruitive sacrifices. This is the
process recommended for this age and those who are actually intelligent will perform
kåñëa-saìkértana with great enthusiasm.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
188 Chapter 5
präyeëa bhakti-yogena sat-saìgena vinoddhava
nopäyo vidyate samyak präyaëaà hi satäm aham
O Uddhava, I am the supreme shelter and goal of life of the devotees. If one does not
engage in My devotional service, which is received by the association of My pure devotees,
there will be no means for his escaping material existence.
COMMENTARY
The  paths  of  jïäna  and  bhakti  have  both  been  described  but  here  it  is  said  that
deliverance from material existence is possible only by devotional service, which is to be
performed in the association of devotees. Pure devotional service to the Lord is called
kevala-bhakti, whereas devotional service mixed with speculative propensities is called
guëa-bhüta-bhakti,  or  devotional  service  polluted  by  the  material  modes  of  nature.
Actually,  as  stated  in  the  Çrémad  Bhägavatam,  pure  devotional  service  automatically
awards one knowledge and detachment. On the other hand, without devotional service,
the  cultivation  of  knowledge  cannot  award  one  perfection.  Processes  for  spiritual
perfection  other  than  devotional  service  are  described  as  being  like  the  nipples  on  a
goat’s neck. One can never hope to get milk from such useless nipples and one cannot
achieve perfection by any process other than devotional service.
In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.19.9) Çré Uddhava said:
täpa-trayeëäbhihitasya ghore santapyamänasya bhavädhvanéha
paçyämi nänyac charaëaà taväìghri-dvandvätapaträd amåtäbhivarñät
My  dear  Lord,  for  one  who  is  being  cruelly  burned  in  the  blazing  fire  of
material miseries, having fallen into the network of material existence, I do not
see any other possible shelter besides Your two lotus feet, which are a shower of
nectar extinguishing the fire of suffering.
In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (12.4.40) Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé has said:
saàsära-sindhum ati-dustaram uttitérñor
nänyaù plavo bhagavataù puruñottamasya
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Symptoms of Conditioned and Liberated Living Entities
lélä-kathä-rasa-niñevaëam antareëa
puàso bhaved vividha-duùkha-davärditasya
For a person who is suffering in the fire of countless miseries and who desires
to cross the insurmountable ocean of material existence, there is no suitable boat
except that of cultivating devotion to the transcendental taste for the narrations
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead’s pastimes.
In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (4.31.12) Närada Muni has said:
kià vä yogena säìkhyena nyäsa-svadhyäyayor api
kià vä çreyobhir anyaiç ca na yaträtma-prado hariù
Transcendental practices that do not ultimately help one realize the Supreme
Personality of Godhead are useless, be they mystic yoga practices, the analytical
study of matter, severe austerity, the acceptance of sannyäsa, or the study of Vedic
literature.  All  these  may  be  very  important  aspects  of  spiritual  advancement,
but unless one understands the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, all these
processes are useless.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead alone is the ultimate goal and shelter of saintly
persons. Religiosity, economic development, sense gratification, and liberation are not
the ultimate goals of life. Although these are desired by the conditioned souls, they are
full of inauspiciousness. By constantly engaging in the service of the Supreme Lord in
the association of devotees, one certainly achieves the ultimate goal of life.
athaitat paramaà guhyaà çåëvato yadu-nandana
su-gopyam api vakñyämi tvaà me bhåtyaù suhåt sakhä
O Uddhava, O beloved descendant of the Yadu dynasty, because you are My servant,
well-wisher, and friend, I shall now reveal to you the most confidential knowledge. Please
hear these confidential topics from Me.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 5
uddhava-gétä
COMMENTARY
The sages headed by Çaunaka have said in the first chapter of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(1.1.8)  brüyuù  snigdhasya  çiñyasya  guravo  guhyam  apy  uta,  that  a  bona-fide  spiritual
master  will  impart  transcendental  knowledge  unto  the  heart  of  a  sincere  disciple.
Uddhava  had  surrendered  to  Lord  Kåñëa,  and  in  reciprocation,  the  Lord  imparted  to
him transcendental understanding. It is a fact that only unto one who has absolute faith
in the Supreme Lord and the spiritual master is the mystery of spiritual understanding
revealed.  Other  processes  of  elevation  are  incapable  of  delivering  the  desired  results
because it is only by devotional service that the Lord becomes actually pleased. Simply
by accepting the association of pure devotees and working under the direction of the
spiritual  master,  one  attains  all  perfection  of  life.  This  is  the  essential  understanding
gained by study of this chapter.
Thus  ends  the  translation  of  the  fifth  chapter  of  the  Uddhava-géta  entitled  “The
Symptoms  of  Conditioned  and  Liberated  Living  Entities”  with  the  commentaries  of
Çréla  Viçvanätha  Cakravarté  Öhäkura  and  chapter  summary  and  purports  of  Çréla
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 6
beyond renunCIatIon and KnowLedge
CHAPTER SUMMARY
In this chapter, the glories of sädhu saìga, and the superexcellence of the Vrajaväsis’
ecstatic love for Kåñëa, are described.
The  association  of  saintly  devotees  can  destroy  one’s  attachment  to  material  life
and can even bring the Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa, under one’s control. Neither mystic
yoga, Säìkhya philosophy, following religious principles, studying the Vedas, performing
austerities,  cultivating  dry  renunciation,  performing  welfare  activities,  giving  charity,
observing vows such as fasting, worshiping the demigods, chanting secret mantras, nor
visiting holy places of pilgrimage can give one the same result. In every age there are
demons, animals, birds, and other lower classes of beings who are in the modes of passion
and ignorance, as well as human beings such as vaiçyas, çudras, women, and outcastes
who cannot study the Vedas. Nevertheless, by the association of saintly devotees, they
can attain the supreme abode of the Lord. On the other hand, without such association,
even those who very seriously endeavor for perfection in mystic yoga, the cultivation of
knowledge,  giving  charity,  observing  vows,  and  practicing  renunciation,  are  generally
incapable of attaining the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The young damsels of Vraja, ignorant of the true identity of Çré Kåñëa, considered
Him  to  be  their  paramour.  Simply  by  the  influence  of  Lord  Kåñëa’s  association,  they
attained  the  supreme  Absolute  Truth,  which  is  rarely  attained  by  even  demigods  like
Lord Brahmä. These gopés of Vraja were so deeply attached to Kåñëa that they considered
an entire night in His association to be just a moment. When Akrura took Kåñëa and
Baladeva to Mathurä, the gopés considered a night in separation from Kåñëa to be as long
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
192 Chapter 6
as a kalpa. The gopés, who were afflicted by separation from Kåñëa, could not imagine
anything pleasant other than Kåñëa’s association. Therefore the gopés’ love for Kåñëa is
certainly incomparable.
After imparting these instructions to Uddhava, Lord Çré Kåñëa concluded by saying
that he should give up the considerations of religion and irreligion as described in the
çrutis and småtis, and instead take shelter of the example of the women of Våndävana.
TEXTS 1-2
çré-bhagavän uväca
na rodhayati mäà yogo na säìkhyaà dharma eva ca
na svädhyäyas tapas tyägo neñöä-pürtaà na dakñiëä
vratäni yajïaç chandäàsi térthäni niyamä yamäù
yathävarundhe sat-saìgaù sarva-saìgäpaho hi mäm
The  Supreme  Lord  said:  My  dear  Uddhava,  the  association  of  My  pure  devotees
can  destroy  all  one’s  material  attachment.  Such  purifying  association  brings  Me  under
the  control  of  My  devotees.  One  may  perform  yoga,  engage  in  an  analytical  study  of
the  material  nature,  practice  non-violence,  follow  religious  principles,  study  the  Vedas,
perform  austerities,  cultivate  renunciation,  perform  fire  sacrifices,  undertake  welfare
activities, give charity, carry out severe vows, worship the demigods, chant secret mantras,
and control the mind but even by performing such activities one does not bring Me under
his control.
COMMENTARY
This chapter describes the glories of the association of devotees and the Vrajaväsés’
incomparable love for Kåñëa.
The Supreme Lord said, “O Uddhava, the astäìga-yoga system of practicing sitting
postures and controlling the mind, the säìkhya-yoga system of discriminating between
matter and spirit, the practice of non-violence, the study of the Vedas, the performance of
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Beyond Renunciation and Knowledge
severe austerities, the practice of renunciation, the performance of welfare activities like
digging wells, the pious act of giving charity, the observance of vows such as cäturmäsya,
the performance of sacrifices, the worship of the demigods, and the chanting of Vedic
mantras cannot control Me.”
The  word  rodhayati  in  this  verse  is  singular,  indicating  that  it  should  be  applied
separately  to  each  of  the  processes  described.  It  could  also  be  the  plural  rodhayanti
because  of  the  other  plural  word  in  this  verse,  vratäni.  The  verb  ruddha  means  “to
control.”  The  Lord  therefore  says,  “Activities  like  yoga  cannot  control  Me.  I  am  not
controlled  by  astäìga  yogés.  They  cannot  attain  My  shelter.”  This  is  purport  of  this
verse.
The  Supreme  Lord  said,  “O  Uddhava,  the  study  of  säìkhya  and  the  following
of  religious  principles  also  cannot  control  Me.  Study  of  the  Vedas,  performance  of
austerities, and a life of renunciation do not enable one to attain My shelter. The powerful
process of devotional service is the only method of controlling Me and pleasing Me. It
is  an  established  fact  that  I  am  attained  only  by  devotional  service,  and  by  no  other
means. One who simply associates with My pure devotees pleases Me, and so what can
be said of one who renders devotional service to Me in the association of devotees? One
advances  on  the  path  of  devotional  service  in  the  association  of  devotees.  Although
activities like practicing yoga contain some degree of devotion, I am not controlled by
the mixed devotion of such practitioners. Thus, the word  yathä has been used in this
verse, indicating that only when activities are performed in pure devotion are they fully
pleasing to the Lord. Because the association of devotees destroys all of one’s material
attachment, it enables one to bring Me under control.”
PURPORT
The relationships we establish in this temporary material world are not eternal, nor
are  they  actually  beneficial.  The  association  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead
is  attained  by  the  association  of  His  associates.  The  various  methods  for  attaining
perfection in life, such as the atheistic säìkhya philosophical system, the theistic säìkhya
philosophical system, the performance of major and minor religious duties, the study of
the Vedas, the performance of penances, cultivating a life of renunciation, engaging in
welfare activities, giving charity, performing sacrifices, chanting Vedic mantras, taking
bath in holy places, and controlling the mind and senses, are not as effective in pleasing
the Lord as the association of His pure devotees. The Supreme Lord is unconquerable
but  He  is  controlled  by  the  love  of  His  pure  devotees.  All  methods  for  achieving  the
ultimate goal of life that are followed by non-devotees cannot purchase the favor of the
Supreme Lord.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
194 Chapter 6
TEXTS 3-6
sat-saìgena hi daiteyä yätudhänä mågäù khagäù
gandharväpsaraso nägäù siddhäç cäraëa-guhyakäù
vidyädharä manuñyeñu vaiçyäù çüdräù striyo ‘ntya-jäù
rajas-tamaù-prakåtayas tasmiàs tasmin yuge yuge
bahavo mat-padaà präptäs tväñöra-käyädhavädayaù
våñaparvä balir bäëo mayaç cätha vibhéñaëaù
sugrévo hanumän åkño gajo gådhro vaëikpathaù
vyädhaù kubjä vraje gopyo yajïa-patnyas tathäpare
In  every  yuga,  many  who  are  influenced  by  the  modes  of  passion  and  ignorance,
including  demons,  animals,  birds,  Gandharvas,  Apsaräs,  Nägas,  Siddhas,  Cäraëas,
Guhyakas, Vidhyädharas, vaiçyas, çudras, women, and others were able to come back home,
back to Godhead, due to gaining the association of My devotees. Våträsura and Prahläda
Mahäräja also attained My transcendental abode due to the association of devotees, as did
Våñaparvä,  Bali  Mahäräja,  Bäëäsura,  Maya,  Vibhéñaëa,  Sugréva,  Hanumän,  Jämbavän,
Gajendra,  Jaöäyu,  Tulädhära,  Dharma-vyädha,  Kubjä,  the  gopés  of  Våndävana,  and  the
wives of the brähmaëas that were performing sacrifices.
COMMENTARY
These  four  verses  describe  how  the  Supreme  Lord  is  directly  controlled  by  the
gopés of Vraja, and indirectly by demons like King Bäëa. There are two kinds of saintly
persons—those  who  are  engaged  in  activities  based  on  devotional  service,  and  those
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Beyond Renunciation and Knowledge
who  are  engaged  in  pure  unalloyed  devotional  service.  The  controlling  power  of  the
former  is  indirect,  whereas  the    controlling  power  of  the  latter  is  direct.  The  word
yätudhanä  refers  to  demons,  such  as  Tväsöra  and  Våträsura.  Prahläda  received  the
association  of  Çré  Närada  even  before  his  birth.  Soon  after  his  birth,  Våñaparvä  was
rejected by his mother. He was then brought up by a sage and became a devotee of Lord
Viñëü. Bali Mahäräja attained the association of Prahläda Mahäräja. All these examples
are given in the Puräëas. When King Bäëa’s arms were being cut off, he received the
association of Mahädeva. While constructing their assembly house, the demon, Maya,
had  the  association  of  the  Päëòavas.  Vibhéñaëa  received  Hanumän’s  association.  The
monkeys headed by Sugréva received Lakñmaëa’s association. Gajendra, the king of the
elephants,  received  the  association  of  Çré  Närada  in  his  previous  life.  The  giant  bird,
Jaöäyu had Garuòa’s and Daçaratha’s association. The stories of Vaëika or Tulädhära are
narrated in the Mahäbhärata, but it is unclear whose association they had received. The
story of Dharma-vyädha, the nonviolent hunter, was described in the Varäha Puräëa.
In a previous life, he somehow became a brahma-räkñasa, or brähmaëa ghost, but was
eventually  saved.  In  a  previous  Kali-yuga  he  had  the  association  of  a  Vaiñëava  king
named  Väsu.  In  the  Harivaàça,  it  is  stated  that  in  her  previous  life,  Kubjä  had  the
association of Närada. The sages of Daëòakäraëya who appeared as gopés in Vraja had
the  association  of  many  saintly  persons  in  their  previous  life,  and  the  association  of
eternally perfect gopés in their next life. The wives of the brähmaëas who were engaged
in performing sacrifice had the opportunity to associate with Kåñëa’s messengers, Mälé
and Tämbulé, when they went to Mathurä on business.
PURPORT
Simply  by  the  influence  of  the  devotees’  association,  all  of  one’s  incompetence  is
destroyed so that one became qualified to attain the service of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.
te nädhéta-çruti-gaëä nopäsita-mahattamäù
avratätapta-tapasaù mat-saìgän mäm upägatäù
These persons did not study the Vedas, worship saintly persons, or perform terrible
austerities. They had attained My association simply as a result of the association of My
devotees.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
196 Chapter 6
COMMENTARY
According  to  the  advancement  they  made  by  means  of  sädhu-saìga,  the  above-
mentioned persons either achieved mixed devotional service or pure devotional service.
There was no need for them to follow other sädhanas. They did not study the Vedas,
which  indicates  that  they  did  not  approach  sages  who  were  well-acquainted  with
the  Vedas.  Similarly,  they  did  not  perform  any  austerities  or  execute  any  vows.  They
developed devotional service simply by the association of the Lord’s devotees and thus
ultimately attained His shelter.
PURPORT
Without  following  any  other  sädhana,  simply  by  the  influence  of  the  devotees’
association, one can attain the devotional service of Supreme Lord.
kevalena hi bhävena gopyo gävo nagä mågäù
ye ‘nye müòha-dhiyo nägäù siddhä mäm éyur aïjasä
All of the residents of Våndävana—the gopés, cows, trees and plants, animals, and
serpents very easily attained life’s perfections because of their love for Me.
COMMENTARY
The unique position of the gopés is herein described. The word kevala means “devoid
of  karma  and  jïana,”  or in other words pure devotional service, without any tinge of
material  desire.  Devotional  service  to  the  Lord  is  rendered  in  the  moods  of  çåìgära,
vätsalya, sakhya, and däsya. The gopés attained the Lord by serving Him in the mood of
mädhuyra rasa, the cows in the mood of vätsalya rasa, Govardhana Hill and the deer in
the mood of sakhya rasa, and the trees and creepers of Våndävana, as well as the Käliya
serpent, in the mood of däsya rasa. The gopés referred to in this verse are the eternally
perfect gopés. Indeed, all the inhabitants of Våndävana should be considered eternally
liberated  souls,  as  expressed  by  the  word  siddhäù,  which  means  “having  achieved  the
perfection of life.”
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Beyond Renunciation and Knowledge
PURPORT
By love and devotion, persons who appear to be incompetent can achieve the mercy
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
yaà na yogena säìkhyena däna-vrata-tapo-’dhvaraiù
vyäkhyä-svädhyäya-sannyäsaiù präpnuyäd yatnavän api
Even though others engaged with great endeavor in the mystic yoga system, philosophical
speculation, giving charity, executing vows and penances, performing ritualistic sacrifices,
teaching the Vedic mantras to others, a personal study of the Vedas, or the renounced
order of life, they could not achieve Me.
COMMENTARY
Even if one faithfully practices the yoga system, one cannot attain the devotional
service  of  the  Lord.  Association  of  devotees  is  the  only  criteria  for  attaining  pure
devotional service, and not any other discipline or pious activity. This is the purport of
this verse.
PURPORT
Even  if  one  carefully  studies  the  atheistic  or  theistic  Säìkhya  philosophy,  gives
charity, observes vows, undergoes austerity, performs sacrifices, studies the Vedas, and
explains the Vedic literature to others, one will still not attain the mercy of the Supreme
Lord.
rämeëa särdhaà mathuräà praëéte çväphalkinä mayy anurakta-cittäù
vigäòha-bhävena na me viyoga-tévrädhayo ‘nyaà dadåçuù sukhäya
When Akrüra took Me to Mathurä, along with My brother, Baladeva, the gopés, whose
hearts were completely attached to Me, felt severe mental agony due to separation from
Me. They thus could not consider any source of happiness other than My association.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
198 Chapter 6
COMMENTARY
That the devotional mood of the gopés is the topmost form of devotional service is
being  stressed  in  these  four  verses.  When  Kåñëa  was  brought  to  Mathurä  by  Akrüra,
the gopés could not see anything that would give them happiness because their love for
Kåñëa was so intense. The gopés were situated on the platform of adhirüòha mahäbhäva.
In such a loving condition, they felt severe mental agony due to separation from their
beloved, Kåñëa. Because this verse is spoken in the past tense, it is understood that the
gopés rejoined Kåñëa after the killing of Dantavakra.
PURPORT
No one who desires actual happiness can achieve his goal of life without engaging in
the devotional service of the Supreme Lord, who is eternal, full of knowledge, and full of
bliss. The gopés, whose attachment for Kåñëa was intense, felt unlimited distress because
of separation from Him, when He and Baläräma left for Mathurä with Akrüra.
täs täù kñapäù preñöhatamena nétä mayaiva våndävana-gocareëa
kñaëärdha-vat täù punar aìga täsäà hénä mayä kalpa-samä babhüvuù
Dear Uddhava, the nights that the  gopés spent with Me in Våndävana appeared to
them to be no more than a moment. Now, in separation from Me, a night appears to them
to be longer than a kalpa.
COMMENTARY
On  the  topmost  platform  of  love  of  God,  there  are  symptoms  such  as  adhiruòha
mahäbhäva. Even a kalpa seems like a moment because of attachment for Kåñëa. And,
the  same  moment  appears  like  a  kalpa  in  separation  from  Kåñëa.  Lord  Kåñëa  says,
“Although the gopés spent an entire night of Brahmä with Me enjoying the räsa dance,
they considered it to be less than a moment. This was their experience when they were
with  Me  in  Våndävana.”  And  yet,  the  gopés  considered  the  same  one  moment  to  be
more  than  hundreds  of  yugas  whenever  Kåñëa  went  to  the  pasturing  grounds  to  tend
the cows.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Beyond Renunciation and Knowledge
tä nävidan mayy anuñaìga-baddha-dhiyaù svam ätmänam adas tathedam
yathä samädhau munayo ‘bdhi-toye nadyaù praviñöä iva näma-rüpe
Just as sages, by means of samädhi, forget the names and forms of this world because
of their full absorption in the self, like rivers merging into the ocean, the gopés were so
attached  to  Me  that  they  could  not  even  think  of  their  own  bodies,  their  lives  in  this
world, or their future lives.
COMMENTARY
It is stated in Ujjvala-nélamaëi that forgetfulness without any question of illusion
is a feature of adhiruòha mahäbhäva. This is being described in this verse, wherein it
is said about the gopés, “their intelligence was captivated by My association.” Here, the
word baddha or “captivated” means that the propensity of the intelligence has become
more  enthusiastic due  to  the  enchanting  pastimes  of  Çré  Kåñëa.  These  propensities  of
the intelligence are just like wish-fulfilling cows that fulfills all of Kåñëa’s desires. The
gopés  could  not  know  who  they  were,  where  they  were,  or  where  had  they  come  from
while  performing  räsa  dance.  They  transgressed  all  worldly  etiquette,  shyness,  fear,
and  so  on,  just  like  sages  who  forget  everything  when  they  realize  Brahman  while  in
samädhi. The gopés are herein compared to sages in samädhi because they both exhibit
single-minded  concentration.  Actually,  the  ecstatic  love  of  the  gopés  is  far  superior  to
the dry meditation of the sages who are trying to liberate themselves from the material
body. The gopés did not possess material bodies because they were personally dancing
with the Supreme Lord and embracing Him. It should be very well understood that the
bliss of impersonal Brahman realization hardly equals a tiny fragment of the ocean of
ecstatic love of Kåñëa. The Supreme Lord comes under the control of His pure devotees.
The sages were not attached to the Supreme Lord and so they could not control Him
with their love. Rivers enter the ocean, losing their separate identity. This is an example
to illustrate how devotees become fully absorbed in thoughts of Kåñëa and thus relish
the mellows of devotional service without any concern for their personal existence.
PURPORT
The gopés, whose hearts were fully attached to Kåñëa and who were thus in a trance
of meditation upon the service of the Lord, completely forgot about their relatives, as
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
200 Chapter 6
well as their gross and subtle bodies. They forgot about their personal existence—their
names, forms, and so on—just as a river loses its identity after entering the ocean.
mat-kämä ramaëaà järam asvarüpa-vido ‘baläù
brahma mäà paramaà präpuù saìgäc chata-sahasraçaù
All  those  hundreds  of  thousands  of  cowherd  girls,  although  ignorant  of  My  actual
position  as  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  attained  Me  simply  by  desiring  My
association as their paramour.
COMMENTARY
Çré  Kåñëa  herein  explains  how  the  gopés  attained  His  shelter:  “The  gopés  desired
nothing  but  Me,  the  supreme  Brahman.  How  did  they  attain  Me?  I  enjoyed  pastimes
with them and thus they experienced great happiness.” In the Çrémad Bhägavatam, Çré
Çukadeva Gosvämé said, “After seeing the beauty of Våndävana, Kåñëa desired to enjoy
His räsa-lélä pastimes. Although Kåñëa is self-sufficient, He enjoyed the räsa dance with
the gopés.” Did the gopés enjoy Kåñëa’s company as a husband? No, as a paramour. What
was  the  essential  characteristic  of  the  gopés?  The  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead
said,  “The  gopés  were  so  attracted  by  My  sweetness  and  beauty  that  they  forgot  about
My opulent features. Otherwise, it would not have been possible for Me to enjoy their
company. Although they were the most beautiful girls in the creation, they forgot about
their own beauty, being attracted by My beauty.” This is what is being indicated by the
word asvarüpa-vidaù, “not understanding My actual position or form.”
PURPORT
Because  of  their  strong  desire  to  please  Kåñëa,  the  gopés,  who  were  completely
absorbed  in  the  service  of  the  Lord,  and  who  had  only  one  goal  in  life,  attained  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The gopés were many and the Lord was one. Following
their example, innumerable persons of a similar nature attained the association of the
Absolute  Truth,  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Çré  Kåñëa.  Although,  from  an
external point of view, the gopés may be considered as women attached to a man other
than their husband, because they took shelter of the supreme enjoyer, their conduct is
always to be glorified.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Beyond Renunciation and Knowledge
TEXTS 14-15
tasmät tvam uddhavotsåjya codanäà praticodanäm
pravåttià ca nivåttià ca çrotavyaà çrutam eva ca
mäm ekam eva çaraëam ätmänaà sarva-dehinäm
yähi sarvätma-bhävena mayä syä hy akuto-bhayaù
Therefore, My dear Uddhava, abandon the mantras of the çrutis and småtis, as well as
the rules and regulations prescribed in the supplementary Vedic literature. Disregard all
that you have heard, and all that is to be heard, and just surrender unto Me alone because
I am the Supersoul of all living entities. By taking shelter of Me, you will certainly be
freed from fear in all circumstances, by My mercy.
COMMENTARY
After Çré Uddhava had inquired about the characteristics of a saintly person, the
Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, described the characteristics of the two classes of transcendentalists,
the  methods  for  executing  devotional  service  in  the  association  of  devotees,  and  how
devotional  service  has  the  power  to  control  Him.  The  Lord  next  described  the  good
qualities of the devotees and concluded that the gopés’ devotion to Him is the topmost
platform  of  love  of  God.  The  Lord  further  described  how,  when  He  was  being  taken,
along  with  Balaräma,  by  Akrüra  to  Mathurä,  the  gopés  shed  incessant  tears  due  to
impending  separation  from  Him.  The  gopés  were  greatly  agitated  due  to  feelings  of
ecstatic love in separation from the Lord and thus their devotional service could control
Him. Here, Lord Çré Kåñëa is trying to inspire Uddhava to follow in the footsteps of the
gopés and thus render devotional service as they did. Çré Kåñëa said to Uddhava, “Give
up the rules and regulations prescribed in the scriptures, and give up all recommended
and prohibited activities mentioned in the Vedas.” Does this mean that Uddhava should
take  sannyäsa?  No,  it  means  that  he  should  give  up  the  activities  that  are  prescribed
for both householders and sannyäsés, and he should become indifferent to all that has
been heard, as well as all that may be heard in the future. In this way, Uddhava should
abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender to Kåñëa in the mood of one of the
five rasas. Then, he will have no  fear, by  Kåñëa’s mercy. He should not think that  he
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
202 Chapter 6
will  be  the  loser  by  rejecting  fruitive  activities  and  the  cultivation  of  knowledge.  The
Supreme Lord is there to protect His devotees from all types of fearful conditions.
PURPORT
After  carefully  deliberating  on  that  which  was  spoken  by  the  Supreme  Lord,  one
should simply surrender himself at the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
knowing that this will eradicate all lamentation, illusion, and fear. Taking shelter of too
many persons will not award one any real benefit. Rather, by taking shelter of the son
of king of Vraja alone, who is one without a second, one will easily be liberated from the
hands of all inauspiciousness.
´Î3{H 3HÌ=
çré-uddhava uväca
saàçayaù çåëvato väcaà tava yogeçvareçvara
na nivartata ätma-stho yena bhrämyati me manaù
Çré Uddhava said: O Lord of the foremost yogis, even after hearing Your statements,
the doubt in my heart has not gone away, so my mind is bewildered.
COMMENTARY
Uddhava says, “My dear Lord Kåñëa, You had first recommended that I perform my
duties according to the varëäçrama system, but then You advised me to give up these
activities  and  take  to  the  advancement  of  knowledge.  Now,  You  seem  to  be  rejecting
the path of jïäna, and recommending that I surrender unto You and practice bhakti-
yoga. If I accept this path, how do I not know that in the future You will not once again
recommend  that  I  perform  my  worldly  duties.”  Such  frank  talk  indicates  Uddhava’s
intimate relationship with Lord Kåñëa.
PURPORT
In the first verse of the fourth chapter, the Lord said that one should take shelter
of  Him  while  continuing  to  perform  one’s  prescribed  duties  within  the  varëäçrama
system  without  material  desire.  Uddhava  took  this  to  mean  karma-miçrä  bhakti,  or
devotional service mixed with fruitive activities. Of course, if one has not yet realized
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Beyond Renunciation and Knowledge
that Lord Kåñëa is the cause of all causes, there is no question of renouncing worldly
responsibilities. Such a person is encouraged to offer the fruits of his work to the Lord.
In the fourth verse of the fourth chapter, the Lord recommended that one give up his
worldly duties and engage in the  cultivation of knowledge. Uddhava took this to mean
jïäna-miçrä bhakti, or devotional service mixed with speculative knowledge. Beginning
with verse thirty-five of the fourth chapter, Uddhava inquired about the two conditions
of  existence—material  bondage  and  liberation.  In  response,  the  Lord  explained  that
without devotional service, mere philosophical speculation cannot enable one to attain
perfection. In verse eighteen of chapter five, faith in the Supreme Personality of Godhead
was extolled, and in verse twenty-three, Kåñëa recommended hearing and chanting the
glories  of  the  Lord.  The  Lord  concluded  by  saying  that  the  association  of  devotees  is
essential for spiritual advancement. In verse twenty-six of the fifth chapter, Uddhava
inquired  about  the  details  of  devotional  service  and  the  characteristics  of  perfection.
And in verse forty-eight, Lord Kåñëa stated that only engagement in devotional service
awards one liberation. Finally, in verse fourteen of this chapter the Lord firmly rejected
both fruitive activities and mental speculation and in verse fifteen, He recommended
that one surrender unto Him unconditionally.
After receiving so many instructions, Uddhava appears to be bewildered about what
he should actually do. For this reason, Uddhava requests Lord Kåñëa to clearly tell him
exactly what he should do.
çré-bhagavän uväca
sa eña jévo vivara-prasütiù präëena ghoñeëa guhäà praviñöaù
mano-mayaà sükñmam upetya rüpaà mäträ svaro varëa iti sthaviñöhaù
The Supreme Lord said: My dear Uddhava, the Supreme Lord is situated within the
hearts of all living beings. It is only by His presence that the life air functions so that the
physical processes continue to function. The Lord’s subtle presence within the heart can
be perceived by seeing how the mind is under superior control. The Lord also appears as
the sound of the Vedas, which is composed of short and long vowels and consonants.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
204 Chapter 6
COMMENTARY
Uddhava was bewildered because Lord Kåñëa had explained many different processes,
such as devotional service, speculative knowledge, renunciation, mystic yoga, austerities,
and  pious  duties.  All  of  these  processes  are  meant  to  help  the  living  entities  obtain
the shelter of Lord Kåñëa, either directly or indirectly. Thus, Lord Kåñëa explained the
entire  Vedic  system,  from  the  beginning  stages,  to  the  most  advanced.  Actually,  Lord
Kåñëa was surprised that Uddhava thought that he was meant to practice every process,
as if the instructions were just meant for him. Lord Kåñëa therefore wants to inform His
devotee, “My dear Uddhava, when I told you that analytic knowledge is to be practiced,
pious duties are to be performed, devotional service is obligatory, yoga procedures must
be  observed,  and  austerities  are  to  be  executed,  I  was  instructing  all  living  entities,
although you were My immediate audience. Whatever I spoke in the past, have spoken
now, and will speak in the future should be understood as guidance for all living entities
in different situations. How could you possibly think that you were meant to practice
all of the different Vedic processes? I accept you as you are now, My pure devotee. You
are not supposed to execute all of these processes.” In this way, with lighthearted and
encouraging words, the Lord revealed to Uddhava the deep purpose behind the variety
of Vedic procedures.
The  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  is  the  knower  of  the  Vedas  and  it  was  He
who appeared from the four mouths of Brahmä in the form of the Vedas. This is being
described in this verse. The word jéva indicates that it is the Supreme Lord who gives
life. The Lord is speaking this verse with firm conviction while touching His chest with
His index finger. The word vivara indicates that the Vedas have manifested from the
womb of Brahmä’s body. The word ghoña means “transcendental sound vibration.” This
sound  vibration,  along  with  the  life  air,  entered  the  heart  of  Brahmä  and  manifested
in the form of the Vedas, which is composed of short and long vowels, and consonants
pronounced with high and low tones.
PURPORT
When  Kåñëa  and  Balaräma  left  for  Mathurä,  the  gopés  became  greatly  afflicted
due to the pain of separation from Kåñëa. They could not imagine any other source of
happiness than the association of Kåñëa. This has been described in the tenth verse.
In the thirteenth verse of this chapter, the purport of all the Vedic literatures has
been  explained.  Then,  in  two  verses,  the  supremacy  of  the  Supreme  Lord  has  been
described. The Lord is the ultimate shelter of everyone and all the Vedic mantras are
transcendental sound vibrations that have emanated from Him.
Çréla  Çrédhara  Svämé  has  described  the  word  vivara  as  meaning  “the  basis  of
everything.”  This  has  been  elaborately  discussed  in  verses  thirty-six  to  forty-three  of
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Beyond Renunciation and Knowledge
the twenty-first chapter of the Eleventh Canto. Transcendental sound vibration appear
in two forms—gross and subtle. From the subtle form, the life air, intelligence, and mind
are manifest. From the gross form, the senses, parä, paçyanté, madhyamä, and vaikharé
manifest.  The  mind  and  the  senses  are  particularly  described  as  parä,  or  präëamayé.
When  subtle  substance  is  associated  with  the  transcendental  sound  vibration,  it  is
known as manomayé paçyanté. When praëava, or oà, is manifest, it is called buddhimayé
madhyamä.  When  praëava  transforms  into  alphabets,  it  is  called  vaikharé.  Vaikharé
produces different meters, such as båhaté.
The tenth verse presents another meaning. The Supreme Personality of Godhead
is the life and soul of Vraja. Although Lord Kåñëa eternally performs His pastimes in
the  spiritual  world,  beyond  the  vision  of  the  conditioned  souls,  He  also  enters  within
the  material  universe  to  display  these  same  pastimes.  The  words  guhäà  praviñöaù
indicates that after displaying such pastimes, the Lord withdraws them and enters into
His  unmanifest  pastimes,  or  those  pastimes  not  manifest  to  the  conditioned  souls.  In
this  case,  mäträ  indicates  the  transcendental  senses  of  the  Lord,  svara  indicates  the
Lord’s  transcendental  sound  vibration  and  singing,  and  the  word  varëa  indicates  the
transcendental form of the Lord. The word sthaviñöha, or “gross manifestation,” means
that the Lord becomes manifest in the material world even to those devotees who are
not  completely  advanced  in  Kåñëa  consciousness  and  whose  vision  is  not  completely
purified. Manomaya indicates that somehow or other Lord Kåñëa is to be kept within
one’s mind; and for the non-devotees Lord Kåñëa is sükñma, or most subtle, because He
cannot be known.
yathänalaù khe ‘nila-bandhur uñmä balena däruëy adhimathyamänaù
aëuù prajäto haviñä samedhate tathaiva me vyaktir iyaà hi väëé
When two pieces of wood are vigorously rubbed together, heat is produced by contact
with air, so that a spark appears. Once the fire is kindled, ghee is added so that the fire
blazes. Similarly, I am manifest in the sound vibration of the Vedas.
COMMENTARY
Lord  Kåñëa  said  to  Uddhava,  “Although  there  is  fire  within  wood,  it  does  not
manifest until there is friction with another piece of wood. When two pieces of wood
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
206 Chapter 6
are  vigorously  rubbed  together,  sparks  appear  with  the  help  of  the  air.  Thereafter,  it
becomes a blazing fire as one continues to pour ghee upon it. Similarly, the Vedas are
produced  from  Me.  Who  other  than  Me  can  know  the  confidential  purport  of  the
Vedas? It is I who have prescribed the process of karma, jïäna, and bhakti, so that the
conditioned souls can become  delivered from material  existence. My dear Uddhava,  I
am now imparting the proper understanding of these processes to you because you are
the  person  most  qualified  to  receive  this  knowledge.  Later  on,  you  will  enlighten  the
sages at Badarikäçrama, thus enabling them to achieve life’s ultimate goal.
PURPORT
The pastimes of the Supreme Lord become manifest when there is glorification of
the  Lord  in  the  association  of  devotees.  Just  as  fire,  which  remains  in  an  unmanifest
state, is produced by the friction of two pieces of wood, and then becomes a blazing fire
with the help of air and ghee, the manifestation of the Lord’s pastimes, along with His
names, forms, and qualities, is realized by means of kértana. Simply by the chanting of
the holy name of Kåñëa, His forms, qualities, and pastimes become manifest.
evaà gadiù karma gatir visargo ghräëo raso dåk sparçaù çrutiç ca
saìkalpa-vijïänam athäbhimänaù sütraà rajaù-sattva-tamo-vikäraù
It  should  be  understood  that  the  functions  of  the  working  senses—the  organ  of
speech, the hands, the legs, the genital and the anus—and the functions of the knowledge-
acquiring senses—the nose, tongue, eyes, skin and ears—along with the functions of the
subtle senses of mind, intelligence, consciousness, and false ego, as well as the function of
the subtle pradhäna and the interaction of the three modes of material nature—are all
My materially manifest form.
COMMENTARY
Lord Kåñëa said to Uddhava, “Everything visible in this world should be known as
external manifestations of Myself. The function of the hands is to work. The function
of the legs is to move about. The function of the tongue is to vibrate various sounds. The
functions of the genitals and anus are to pass urine and stool. These are the activities
of the working senses. The function of the nose is to smell. The function of the tongue
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Beyond Renunciation and Knowledge
is to taste. The function of the eyes is to see. The function of the skin is to touch, and
the function of the ears is to hear. These are the activities of the knowledge-acquiring
senses. The function of the mind is to make plans. The function of the intelligence is
to put the plans of the mind into practical action. The function of the false ego is to
manifest pride, and the function of the material nature is to create transformations of
the three modes.
PURPORT
The visible material variegatedness is made possible by the transformations of the
three modes of material nature. This varigatedness is supported by the functions of the
organs of speech, the hands, the legs, the genitals, and the anus, as well as the nose, the
tongue,  the  eyes,  the  ears,  the  skin,  the  mind,  the  intelligence,  the  false  ego,  and  the
material  nature,  which  is  called  pradhäna,  from  which  the  living  entities,  the  senses,
and the demigods have been created. The original source of all of this variegatedness
is the Supreme Lord. All of these manifestations gradually help one to attain the lotus
feet of the Supreme Lord, who is the complete spiritual whole, and who is the supreme
shelter for all.
Those who are averse to the service of the Supreme Lord glorify the functions of
the mind, as a result of being bewildered by false ego, and so cannot understand how
everything is an emanation from the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Actually, all material objects can be properly utilized in the service of the Supreme
Lord.  Not  understanding  the  variegated  pastimes  of  the  supreme  spirit  whole,  people
who are absorbed in the impersonal conception of the Absolute Truth falsely consider
eternal devotional service and temporary material enjoyment to be one and the same.
ayaà hi jévas tri-våd abja-yonir avyakta eko vayasä sa ädyaù
viçliñöa-çaktir bahudheva bhäti béjäni yonià pratipadya yadvat
Many seeds grow into different kinds of plants when they are placed in an agricultural
field, although they arise from a single source, the soil. Similarly, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, who originally exists in an unmanifested form, who is the source of the three
modes  of  material  nature,  who  is  eternal,  and  who  is  the  source  of  the  universal  lotus
flower in which the cosmic manifestation takes place, divides His material potencies and
thus appears to be manifest in innumerable forms, although He is one.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
208 Chapter 6
COMMENTARY
Here, the Lord wishes to establish that this material world, which has emanated from
Him, is non-different from Him. The Supreme Lord is the shelter of the three modes of
material nature, and He is the original cause of the fourteen planetary systems. Before
the creation, the Lord existed in His original transcendental form. He then manifested
Himself in the form of the universe, so that the knowledge-acquiring senses and working
senses were produced from His energy, as were the human beings and demigods.
PURPORT
The  word  avyakta  indicates  the  Lord’s  transcendental  form,  which  exists  alone
before the material creation. The Lord’s original form, being spiritual, does not undergo
birth, transformation or death. It is eternal. In the course of time, the Lord’s material
potencies are divided and manifest as bodies, bodily paraphernalia, sense objects, bodily
expansions,  false  ego  and  false  proprietorship.  Thus  the  Lord  expands  His  conscious
living potency called jéva-çakti, which is manifest in innumerable material forms such as
those of men, demigods, animals, and so on. Being bewildered by false ego, non-devotees
indulge  in  material  sense  gratification  and  thus  fail  to  understand  that  the  internal
potency of the Supreme Lord as the original source of His external potency. Only when,
due  to  an  inclination  for  devotional  service,  one  develops  a  sense  of  discrimination
between matter and spirit, can he understand himself to be an eternal servant of the
Lord.  The  conditioned  souls,  on  the  other  hand,  being  in  the  bodily  concept  of  life,
think that material nature has the power to create living entities, under the control of
time.
yasminn idaà protam açeñam otaà paöo yathä tantu-vitäna-saàsthaù
ya eña saàsära-taruù puräëaù karmätmakaù puñpa-phale prasüte
Just as a cloth is a manifestation of lengthwise and crosswise threads, the universe is
expanded on the lengthwise and crosswise potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The  conditioned  soul  has  been  accepting  material  bodies  since  time  immemorial,  and
these bodies are like trees sustaining his material existence. Just as a tree first blossoms
and then produces fruit, the tree of material existence, one’s material body, produces the
various results of material existence.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Beyond Renunciation and Knowledge
COMMENTARY
The material universe is an expansion of the illusory potency of the Supreme Lord
and is always dependent on Him and non-different from Him. This simple understanding
can relieve the conditioned souls from endless wandering in the unhappy kingdom of
Maya.  In  this  verse,  the  example  is  given  of  a  cloth,  which  is  made  of  threads,  and  is
therefore non-different from the threads. Similarly, this universe is a manifestation of
the potency of the Lord and is therefore not different from Him. The example of a tree
is also given in this verse. The tree of material existence, or the material body, produces
flowers and fruit, in the form of happiness and distress.
TEXTS 22-23
dve asya béje çata-mülas tri-nälaù païca-skandhaù païca-rasa-prasütiù
daçaika-çäkho dvi-suparëa-néòas tri-valkalo dvi-phalo ‘rkaà praviñöaù
adanti caikaà phalam asya gådhrä gräme-carä ekam araëya-väsäù
haàsä ya ekaà bahu-rüpam ijyair mäyä-mayaà veda sa veda vedam
This  tree  of  material  existence  has  two  seeds—piety  and  impiety.  The  unlimited
material desires are its roots, the three modes of material nature are its trunks, the five
material  elements  are  its  branches,  the  eleven  senses  are  its  sub-branches,  and  the  five
sense objects are its juice. Air, bile, and mucous are its three layers of bark. Happiness
and distress are its fruit, and the individual soul and the Supersoul are the two birds that
live in this tree. This tree extends up to the sun. Lusty householders enjoy one of the
fruits  of  this  tree  (distress),  and  swan-like  sannyäsés  enjoy  the  other  fruit  (happiness).
One who, with the help of the worshipable spiritual master, can understand this tree to
be a manifestation of the Supreme Lord actually knows the confidential meaning of the
Vedas.
COMMENTARY
In this verse, the tree of material existence is being described. Piety and impiety are
the two seeds of this tree. The unlimited material desires of the living entities are its
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
210 Chapter 6
roots, and the modes of material nature are its trunks. The five material elements are
its branches, the five sense objects are its juice, the eleven senses are its sub-branches,
and the individual soul and the Supersoul are two golden birds who reside in a nest in
that  tree.  Air,  bile,  and  mucous  are  the  tree’s  three  layers  of  bark  and  happiness  and
distress  are  its  fruit.  This  tree  extended  up  to  the  sun.  Lusty  householders  enjoy  one
of  the  fruits,  in  the  form  of  distress.  For  the  conditioned  souls,  both  heaven  and  hell
are miserable. The swan-like sannyäsés enjoy another fruit of this tree, in the form of
happiness. Knowledge of the Absolute truth is always relishable. One who, with the help
of the worshipable spiritual master, understands the various manifestations of the one
Supreme Lord actually realizes the confidential purport of the Vedas.
PURPORT
All  gross  and  subtle  forms  of  existence,  and  the  tree  of  material  existence  itself,
which is born from karma performed since time immemorial, are inseparably connected
to  each  other,  just  like  the  horizontal  and  vertical  threads  of  a  cloth.  The  Supreme
Lord  is  the  origin  of  the  cause  of  creation,  in  the  form  of  Brahmä,  and  the  effect,  in
the form of the universe. The tree of material existence produces flowers in the form
of material happiness and distress, and fruits in the form of bondage and liberation. By
the  influence  of  karma,  piety  and  impiety  are  created.  Material  desires  are  the  cause
of  committing  pious  and  sinful  activities.  The  three  trunks  of  this  tree  are  the  three
modes  of  material  nature,  the  five  material  elements  are  its  branches,  and  the  eleven
senses  are  its  sub-branches.  Happiness  and  distress  are  the  fruits  of  this  tree  that  are
tasted by the conditioned souls. There is a nest in the tree of material existence wherein
two birds—the individual soul and the Supersoul—reside. Air, bile, and mucous are the
coverings of bark of this tree. The material universe extends up to the sun. Those who
are  attracted  to  sense  enjoyment  suffer  distress  under  the  control  of  material  desires.
Those in the renounced order of life who are free from all desires for temporary sense
gratification enjoy happiness even in this life. When one can see the Supreme Lord as
the ultimate cause of everything, then his knowledge is perfect.
evaà gurüpäsanayaika-bhaktyä vidyä-kuöhäreëa çitena dhéraù
vivåçcya jéväçayam apramattaù sampadya cätmänam atha tyajästram
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Beyond Renunciation and Knowledge
With steady intelligence, you should advance to the platform of unalloyed devotional
service by faithful worship of the spiritual master. With the sharpened axe of transcendental
knowledge, you should cut off the subtle material coverings of the soul. Upon realizing
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, you should then give up the axe of transcendental
knowledge.
COMMENTARY
Lord Kåñëa said to Uddhava, “Try to understand this tree of material existence and
thus make your life successful. By the sharp axe of such knowledge, you can cut to pieces
your gross and subtle bodies, which are manifestations of the three modes of material
nature. After attaining realization of the Supersoul, you can then discard the weapon
of transcendental knowledge. Whatever I am speaking is just what I had taught Arjuna
in the Bhagavad-gétä.”
PURPORT
An  intelligent  person,  desirous  of  freedom  from  material  existence,  should  take
shelter  of  a  bona  fide  spiritual  master  and  render  service  to  him,  considering  him  to
be the topmost devotee of the Supreme Lord. While engaged in the devotional service
of  the  Supreme  Lord,  one  should  destroy  all  obstacles  with  the  axe  of  transcendental
knowledge. In this way, one can come to transcend the three modes of material nature.
By  awakening  knowledge  of  one’s  relationship  with  the  Supreme  Lord,  one  can
become  freed  from  material  bondage  and  attain  all  auspiciousness  by  engaging  in  the
devotional service of the Supreme Lord.
Thus ends the translation of the sixth chapter of the Uddhava-géta, entitled “Beyond
Renunciation  and  Knowledge”  with  the  commentaries  of  Çréla  Viçvanätha  Cakravarté
Öhäkura,  and  chapter  summary  and  purports  by  Çréla  Bhaktisiddhänta  Sarasvaté
Öhäkura.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 7
the haàsa-avatära answers the QuestIons of the sons of brahmä
CHAPTER SUMMARY
In this chapter, Lord Çré Kåñëa explains how the conditioned souls become bound
by the three modes of material nature due to being full of desires for sense gratification.
The means for liberating the conditioned souls is also discussed. In this chapter, the Lord
tell how He appeared as Lord Haàsa before Brahmä and his sons, the four Kumäras, and
spoke to them confidentially.
The three modes of material nature—goodness, passion, and ignorance—have no
actual  relationship  with  the  eternal  soul.  One  should  free  himself  from  the  influence
of  the  lower  modes  of  nature—passion  and  ignorance—by  cultivating  the  mode  of
goodness.  Ultimately,  one  should  transcend  the  mode  of  goodness  by  acting  on  the
platform of pure goodness. The three modes of material nature influence one according
to one’s association with particular types of scripture, water, places, times, recipients of
charity, quality of activities, births, meditations, mantras, rituals, and so on.
Being  merged  in  ignorance,  the  conditioned  soul  misidentifies  with  the  material
body, so that the mode of passion conquers the mode of goodness, thus producing misery.
When the mode of passion predominates, the mind becomes filled with insatiable desires
for sense gratification. Those who are tormented by strong urges produced by the mode
of passion become slaves of their senses. Although they can understand that this will
eventually bring on all kinds of misery, they cannot resist the temptation to gratify their
senses. On the other hand, one who is actually intelligent will remain detached from the
objects of the senses by taking shelter of pure devotional service.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
214 Chapter 7
Lord Brahmä is referred to as the unborn original person within the universe. He
is  the  secondary  creator  of  the  living  entities,  and  he  is  the  ultimate  ruler  of  all  the
demigods. And yet even Brahmä is anxious because of his contact with material nature.
Therefore, when he was questioned by his mind-born sons, headed by Sanaka, about the
means for renouncing all desires for sense gratification, he couldn’t conclusively reply.
Therefore,  for  further  enlightenment,  he  took  shelter  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead, so that the Lord appeared before him as the swan incarnation, Lord Haàsa.
Lord  Haàsa  then  instructed  Brahmä  about  the  nature  of  the  self,  the  three  states  of
consciousness (wakefulness, sleep, and deep sleep) and the means for crossing the ocean
of material existence. The sages, headed by Sanaka, became enlightened by hearing the
words of the Lord, and they worshiped Him in a mood of unalloyed devotion.
çré-bhagavän uväca
sattvaà rajas tama iti guëä buddher na cätmanaù
sattvenänyatamau hanyät sattvaà sattvena caiva hi
The Supreme Lord said: The three modes of material nature—goodness, passion, and
ignorance—pertain to material intelligence, and not to the soul. You should subdue the
modes of passion and ignorance by the cultivation of the mode of goodness, Thereafter, you
should conquer even the mode of material goodness by the cultivation of the transcendental
mode of pure goodness.
COMMENTARY
In  this  chapter,  Lord  Çré  Kåñëa  explains  that  one  should  give  up  attachment  to
the  three  modes  of  material  nature,  and  He  also  describes  the  history  of  the  Haàsa
incarnation.  In  the  previous  chapter,  the  Lord  concluded  that  one  should  destroy  the
tree  mode  of  material  existence  by  utilizing  the  axe  of  knowledge.  Now,  in  the  next
seven verses, He will explain how one can acquire that knowledge. The three material
modes—goodness, passion, and ignorance—are qualities of material intelligence. One
must rise above the state of nescience, which are the cause of material bondage. One
should conquer the modes of passion and ignorance by cultivating the mode of goodness
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Haàsa-avatära Answers the Questions of the Sons of Brahmä
and then the mode of goodness can be transcended stepping onto the platform of pure
goodness.
PURPORT
The  subtle  elements—the  mind,  intelligence,  and  false  ego—are  material,  and
under the influence of the three modes of material nature. The spirit soul, on the other
hand, is completely aloof from matter. One should regain his original condition of life by
curtailing the influence of passion and ignorance, by cultivating the mode of goodness,
and  then  transcend  the  influence  of  mixed  material  goodness  by  taking  shelter  of
transcendental goodness (viçuddha-sattva).
sattväd dharmo bhaved våddhät puàso mad-bhakti-lakñaëaù
sättvikopäsayä sattvaà tato dharmaù pravartate
When the conditioned soul becomes firmly situated in the mode of goodness, religious
principles, characterized by devotional service to Me, become prominent in his life. One
can strengthen the mode of goodness by cultivation of those things that are characterized
by goodness.
COMMENTARY
By fixing oneself firmly in the mode of goodness, one can minimize the influence
of the modes of passion and ignorance. When one is situated in the mode of goodness,
he  can  easily  accept  devotional  service  to  the  Lord.  However,  without  engagement  in
devotional service, the cultivation of the mode of goodness is practically useless. How
can one strengthen his position in the mode of goodness? The answer is that by choosing
food, attitudes, work, recreation, etc., strictly in the mode of goodness, one will become
firmly situated in that mode.
PURPORT
The  purified  mode  of  goodness  is  called  véçuddha-sattva,  or  the  transcendental
platform on which there is no trace of any other quality. In pure goodness, knowledge
automatically manifests and one can easily understand one’s eternal loving relationship
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
216 Chapter 7
with  Lord  Kåñëa.  That  is  the  actual  meaning  and  purpose  of  dharma,  or  religious
principles.
dharmo rajas tamo hanyät sattva-våddhir anuttamaù
äçu naçyati tan-mülo hy adharma ubhaye hate
When one follows the religious principles of goodness, this practice frees one from
the influence of passion and ignorance. When passion and ignorance are not present, then
their original cause, irreligion, cannot be seen.
COMMENTARY
When the influence of passion and ignorance is vanquished, irreligious principles
that are born of passion and ignorance are also vanquished.
PURPORT
There  is  no  superior  quality  than  purified  goodness,  which  when  developed,
vanquishes  the  qualities  of  passion  and  ignorance.  When  passion  and  ignorance  are
destroyed, then irreligion, which is the origin of these qualities, is also destroyed.
ägamo ‘paù prajä deçaù kälaù karma ca janma ca
dhyänaà mantro ‘tha saàskäro daçaite guëa-hetavaù
Religious  scriptures,  water,  one’s  association  with  one’s  children  or  with  people  in
general, the particular place, the time, activities, birth, meditation, chanting of mantras,
and purificatory rituals—these vary in quality so that by their association, the modes of
nature become variously prominent.
COMMENTARY
It  has  already  been  described  that  by  eating  food  in  the  mode  of  goodness,  one’s
existence  becomes  purified.  The  next  two  verses  describe  objects  on  the  platform  of
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
goodness.  The  word  ägama  means  “religious  scriptures”,  and  the  word  prajä  means
people in general. There are three kinds of religious scriptures—those in the mode of
goodness, those in the mode of passion, and those in the mode of ignorance.
PURPORT
The three material modes are prominent in varieties of people, water, children, time,
place, action, mantras, and so on.
tat tat sättvikam evaiñäà yad yad våddhäù pracakñate
nindanti tämasaà tat tad räjasaà tad-upekñitam
Among the ten items I have just mentioned, the ones that have been praised by great
sages, such as Çréla Vyäsadeva, are those that are sättvika, or in the mode of goodness.
The  ones  that  have  been  condemned  are  those  that  are  tämasika,  or  in  the  mode  of
ignorance, and the ones that have been neglected are those that are räjasika, or in the
mode of passion.
COMMENTARY
The sättvika scriptures have been glorified by the great sages, the tämasika scriptures
have been criticized, and the räjasika scriptures have been ignored, meaning that they
have neither been praised nor criticized.
PURPORT
Among these ten items, the ones that are beneficial and admirable are sättvika, the
ones that are obnoxious are tämasika, and the ones that simply give rise to indifference
are räjasika.
sättvikäny eva seveta pumän sattva-vivåddhaye
tato dharmas tato jïänaà yävat småtir apohanam
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
218 Chapter 7
Until one attains the platform of self-realization and is thus able to give up his illusory
identification with the gross and subtle bodies, which is caused by the three modes of nature,
he should cultivate the mode of goodness. When one’s quality of goodness is enhanced,
religious  principles  can  be  practiced,  leading  to  an  awakening  of  one’s  transcendental
understanding.
COMMENTARY
One should study those scriptures that are in the mode of goodness and therefore
prescribe detachment from sense gratification and mental speculation. One should not
study the räjasika and tämasika scriptures that propagate the paths of sense gratification
and atheism by means of religious rituals and impersonal philosophy. One should bathe
and quench his thirst with pure water, and remain aloof from contaminated water in
the  form  of  perfume  and  wine.  One  should  associate  with  those  who  are  cultivating
detachment  from  this  material  world  and  give  up  the  association  of  those  who  aspire
for  material  enjoyment,  and  who  are  sinful.  One  should  reside  in  a  solitary  place,  in
the association of devotees. One should not be attracted to gambling in casinos or bars.
One should worship the Supreme Lord during the auspicious time of brähma-muhürta
and avoid the sinful influence of the middle of the night. One should conscientiously
perform  his  prescribed  duties,  and  pious  activities  should  never  be  performed  with  a
desire  to  fulfill  one’s  lusty  ambitions  or  to  give  trouble  to  others.  One  should  receive
an  initiation  mantra  from  a  bona-fide  spiritual  master  and  not  take  initiation  into
the  chanting  of  insignificant  çäkta  mantras.  One  should  meditate  on  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead  and  His  pure  devotees,  and  not  on  lusty  women  and  envious
men.  Following  the  example  of  Lord  Caitanya,  one  should  chant  the  holy  names  of
the  Lord  and  not  songs  that  glorify  the  bondage  of  lust  between  men  and  women.
Purificatory rituals should be accept for the purpose of actual purification, and not for
the purpose of achieving material blessings.
When  one  tries  to  cultivate  the  mode  of  goodness  by  following  the  principles  of
religion,  transcendental  knowledge  will  awaken  within  the  heart.  This  knowledge
consists of the eternal nature of the individual spirit soul and the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Such knowledge frees one from the bodily concept of life and thus destroys
the material designations that cover the conditioned souls. This is the path to eternal
life.
PURPORT
One who diligently remains aloof from the influence of passion and ignorance can
enhance  the  quality  of  goodness.  Only  in  this  way  can  one  achieve  real  knowledge
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
and  thereby  free  oneself  from  the  gross  and  subtle  designations  that  cover  his  pure
existence.
veëu-saìgharña-jo vahnir dagdhvä çämyati tad-vanam
evaà guëa-vyatyaya-jo dehaù çämyati tat-kriyaù
When fire is produced from the friction of bamboos in the forest, it burns the source
of its birth, the bamboo forest. Thus, the fire is calmed by its own action. Similarly, the
gross and subtle bodies of the living entities are created by the interactions of the material
modes of nature. If one uses his gross and subtle body to cultivate knowledge of the self,
then such enlightenment destroys the influence of the material modes of nature. Thus,
like the fire, the body and mind are pacified by their own actions in destroying the source
of their birth.
PURPORT
The term guëa-vyatyaya-jaù indicates that the body is generated by the competition
of the three modes of material nature, which exist everywhere in constantly changing
proportions.  As  fire  produced  by  the  friction  of  bamboo  sticks  burns  a  forest  and
then  becomes  extinguished,  The  gross  and  subtle  bodies,  which  are  generated  by  the
interaction of the modes of material nature, become pacified when the influence of the
modes of nature is destroyed.
´Î3{H 3HÌ=
çré-uddhava uväca
vidanti martyäù präyeëa viñayän padam äpadäm
tathäpi bhuïjate kåñëa tat kathaà çva-kharäja-vat
Çré  Uddhava  said:  Human  beings  can  generally  understand  that  material  life
ultimately awards great misery but still, they try to enjoy it as much as they can. My
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
220 Chapter 7
dear Lord Kåñëa, how can a person who possesses genuine knowledge act just like a dog
or a donkey?
PURPORT
Due  to  an  absence  of  foresight,  dogs,  asses,  and  goats  put  themselves  into  great
danger. A dog steals food, at the risk of being beaten or killed, and he often approaches
a bitch for sex, even though she bares her teeth and snarls, threatening him with severe
injury. An ass approaches a female ass for sex simply to be kicked by her hind legs. He
carries a heavy burden all day long, simply for a little grass that is available everywhere.
A goat is being taken to the slaughterhouse and yet, even in that situation, he happily
approaches  a  female  goat  for  sex.  Similarly,  most  human  beings,  being  without  the
understanding that the acts of sense gratification are the very causes of their suffering,
indulge themselves without restriction. Uddhava wants to know why human beings are
generally mad after sense gratification, even when they know that it will simply cause
them miseries in the future.
TEXTS 9-10
çré-bhagavän uväca
aham ity anyathä-buddhiù pramattasya yathä hådi
utsarpati rajo ghoraà tato vaikärikaà manaù
rajo-yuktasya manasaù saìkalpaù sa-vikalpakaù
tataù kämo guëa-dhyänäd duùsahaù syäd dhi durmateù
The  Supreme  Lord  said:  O  Uddhava,  an  ignorant  person  falsely  identifies  himself
with  the  material  body  and  mind.  In  this  consciousness,  the  mode  of  passion,  which
simply causes distress, overwhelms the mind, which is born of the mode of goodness. The
mind, under the influence of the mode of passion, functions by accepting and rejecting
things, in the hopes of making material advancement. As a result, by constantly thinking
of the products of the modes of material nature, a foolish person becomes afflicted with
unbearable material longings.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Lord says: “Those who thirst for sense gratification cannot be called
learned men, although they think of themselves as very intelligent.”
Although such foolish persons criticize the miseries of material life in innumerable
books, songs, newspapers, television programs, civic committees, etc., they cannot desist
from material life for a single moment. The process by which one is helplessly bound in
illusion is clearly described herein.
PURPORT
The words saìkalpaù sa-vikalpakaù in this verse indicate that materialistic people
are continually making plans in the hopes of attaining happiness and avoiding suffering.
Any sane person must admit that inspite of all such plans, material life is simply full of
miseries. The mind is a creation of the mode of goodness and thus it is not meant for
absorption in attempts to fulfill the animalistic propensities, which are impelled by the
lower modes of passion and ignorance.
karoti käma-vaça-gaù karmäëy avijitendriyaù
Duùkhodarkäëi sampaçyan rajo-vega-vimohitaù
One who fails to control his senses comes under the control of material desires and
is thus bewildered by the strong waves of the mode of passion. Such a person performs
material activities with great enthusiasm, although he clearly sees that the result will be
future unhappiness.
COMMENTARY
In the hopes of increasing his material enjoyment, a person of uncontrolled senses
performs many activities, although he knows very well that they will ultimately bring
him misery.
PURPORT
Being  driven  by  material  desires,  materialistic  people  who  are  controlled  by  their
senses invite unlimited distress.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
222 Chapter 7
rajas-tamobhyäà yad api vidvän vikñipta-dhéù punaù
atandrito mano yuïjan doña-dåñöir na sajjate
When  the  mind  of  an  intelligent  person  is  disturbed  by  the  modes  of  passion  and
ignorance, he should carefully control his mind. By clearly seeing the contamination of
the modes of nature, he does not become attached.
COMMENTARY
Even  though  learned  people  are  sometimes  disturbed  by  the  modes  of  passion
and  ignorance,  coming  under  their  control,  they  do  not  become  attached,  due  to
understanding the inauspicious consequences.
PURPORT
Although  a  learned  person’s  mind  may  become  disturbed  because  of  its  nature  of
accepting and rejecting the things of this world, because he knows that he will incur sin
if he indulges in acts of passion and ignorance, he does not allow himself to be deviated
from his religious life.
apramatto ‘nuyuïjéta mano mayy arpayaï chanaiù
anirviëëo yathä-kälaà jita-çväso jitäsanaù
One should be attentive and grave, and never indolent or depressed. While diligently
practicing the yoga procedures of breathing and sitting postures, one should practice fixing
the mind on Me at dawn, noon, and sunset. In this way, the mind will gradually become
absorbed in Me.
COMMENTARY
The  word  atandrita  means  “cautious.”  One  should  never  be  diverted  by  sense
gratification. Where should one fix his mind? The Supreme Lord is herein giving the
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
answer: “On Me.” If one is unable to fix the mind on the Lord in the beginning, don’t
be discouraged but continue one’s practice to gradually make advancement.
PURPORT
Those who are trying to absorb their minds in thought of the Supreme Lord should
give up  all  desires for enjoying the objects of the external world. They should remain
enthusiastically engaged in the service of the Lord, while practicing äsanas, präëäyäma,
and so on.
etävän yoga ädiñöo mac-chiñyaiù sanakädibhiù
sarvato mana äkåñya mayy addhäveçyate yathä
The actual yoga system as taught by My devotees, headed by Sanaka-kumära, can be
summarized in these few words: After withdrawing the mind from all other objects, one
should completely absorb it in Me without deviation.
´Î3{H 3HÌ=
çré-uddhava uväca
yadä tvaà sanakädibhyo yena rüpeëa keçava
yogam ädiñöavän etad rüpam icchämi veditum
Çré Uddhava said: O Keçava, I would like to know—when, and in what form, did You
instruct the science of yoga to the sages, headed by Sanaka?
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
224 Chapter 7
çré-bhagavän uväca
puträ hiraëyagarbhasya mänasäù sanakädayaù
papracchuù pitaraà sükñmäà yogasyaikäntikém gatim
The  Supreme  Lord  said:  Once,  the  sages,  headed  by  Sanaka,  who  were  born  from
the mind of Brahmä, inquired from him about the difficult subject matter of the goal of
yoga.
COMMENTARY
The phrase aikäntikéà gatim means “the ultimate goal.”
sanakädaya ücuù
guëeñv äviçate ceto guëäç cetasi ca prabho
katham anyonya-santyägo mumukñor atititérñoù
The  sages  headed  by  Sanaka  said:  My  dear  Lord,  the  minds  of  human  beings  are
naturally attracted towards the objects of sense gratification, and the sense objects enter
the mind in the form of material desires. Considering this, how can a person who desires
liberation, who wants to desist from the activities of sense gratification, sever the mutual
tie between the sense objects and the mind? Please explain this to us.
COMMENTARY
The  sons  of  Brahmä  said  to  their  father:  Human  beings  are  naturally  attached  to
sense gratification, and this attachment is firmly rooted within their minds. How is it
possible for a person who wishes to conquer the urges for material enjoyment to cut off
the relationship between the sense objects and the mind?
PURPORT
An intelligent person must understand that as long as he remains conditioned by
material nature, the modes of nature will constantly disturb  him with enticements for
sense  gratification.  If  one  falls  victim  to  such  allurements,  the  perfection  of  life  will
remain unachieved.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
çré-bhagavän uväca
evaà påñöo mahä-devaù svayambhür bhüta-bhävanaù
dhyäyamänaù praçna-béjaà näbhyapadyata karma-dhéù
The Supreme Lord said: My dear Uddhava, Brahmä, who is born from My body, and
who is the creator of the living entities within this material world, being the best among
the  demigods,  seriously  considered  how  to  answer  the  question  of  his  sons,  headed  by
Sanaka. The intelligence of Brahmä, however, was affected by his activities of creation
and so he could not discover the essential answer to their question.
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Lord said: Brahmä is the best among the demigods, and the creator
of the living beings. And yet, even after much consideration, he could not understand
the  actual  answer  of  the  question  placed  before  him  by  his  sons.  This  was  due  to  the
fact  that  his  intelligence  had  been  affected  by  his  activities  of  creation,  which  were
performed with material attachment.
PURPORT
Because of being attached to his activities of creation, Prajäpati Brahmä, the creator
of the living entities, was unable to answer the question of his sons.
sa mäm acintayad devaù praçna-pära-titérñayä
tasyähaà haàsa-rüpeëa sakäçam agamaà tadä
Brahmä, wanted to find out the answer to the question that was puzzling him and so
he meditated on Me. At that time, I appeared before him in My form as Haàsa.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
226 Chapter 7
COMMENTARY
The  Supreme  Lord  said,  “While  thinking  over  the  answer  to  his  sons’  question,
Brahmä absorbed his mind in meditation upon Me. Just to show him mercy, I revealed
Myself  to  Brahmä  by  appearing  before  him  in  My  form  as  Haàsa.  As  the  haàsa,  or
swan, is able to separate milk from water, I appeared to separate Brahmä’s intelligence
from the modes of material nature.”
PURPORT
Being unable to answer the question of Sanaka, Brahmä began to meditate on the
Supreme Lord. At that time, the Lord assumed the form of Haàsa and appeared before
Brahmä. Brahmä then inquired from Haàsa about His identity.
dåñövä mäm ta upavrajya kåtva pädäbhivandanam
brahmäëam agrataù kåtvä papracchuù ko bhavän iti
Upon  seeing  My  form  as  Haàsa,  the  sages,  headed  by  Sanaka,  placing  Brahmä  in
the lead, approached Me and worshiped My lotus feet. They then asked Me, “Who are
You?”
ity ahaà munibhiù påñöas tattva-jijïäsubhis tadä
yad avocam ahaà tebhyas tad uddhava nibodha me
My  dear  Uddhava,  the  sages  were  eager  to  understand  the  actual  purpose  of  yoga
and so they inquired from Me. Now, listen attentively as I repeat My instructions to the
sages.
d~Ì¯Ì ll--ll
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
vastuno yady anänätva ätmanaù praçna édåçaù
kathaà ghaöeta vo viprä vaktur vä me ka äçrayaù
My dear brähmaëas, if you believe that I am also a jéva soul and that there is no ultimate
difference between us—because all souls are ultimately one without individuality—your
question does not seem relevant. Because the spirit soul has no designations, such as caste,
on what basis should I answer your question?
COMMENTARY
The  Haàsa  incarnation  said:  My  dear  brähmaëas,  you  ask  Me,  “Who  are  You?”
because you consider Me to be a living entity like yourselves. Do you think that I possess
a material body, or do you think that I am the Supreme Lord? If you consider Me to be a
living entity, then as a pure spirit soul, on what basis can I distinguish Myself from you?
How could you ask Me such a question?
PURPORT
If  there  is  no  difference  between  the  Supreme  Lord  and  the  living  entities,  then
there is also oneness of the person who is questioning and the person who is answering.
Who should ask a question and to whom? The actual purport of Lord Haàsa’s statement
is that the spirit soul and the Supersoul are separate identities.
païcätmakeñu bhüteñu  samäneñu ca vastutaù
ko bhavän iti vaù praçno väcärambho hy anarthakaù
If, when You asked Me, “Who are You?” you were referring to the material body,
which is made of the five gross material elements—earth, water, fire, air and ether—you
should have asked, “Who are you five?” If you consider that basically all material bodies
are  the  same,  being  made  of  the  same  elements,  then  your  question  cannot  be  taken
seriously.  Thus,  it  appears  that  in  asking  My  identity,  you  are  simply  speaking  words
without any real meaning.
COMMENTARY
In the previous verse, the Lord indicated that if the sages accepted the impersonal
philosophy that all living beings are ultimately one, then the question “Who are You?”
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
228 Chapter 7
made no sense. In this verse, the Lord rejects the false conception that the self is the
material body, which is composed of five gross material elements. The sages might argue
that  even  among  learned  persons,  it  is  a  matter  of  courtesy  to  ask  questions  and  give
answers. After all, the Lord had addressed them as brähmaëas, and thus had also acted
according to social conventions. To answer this argument, the Lord says, “My addressing
you as brähmaëas would have no meaning if we are ultimately one. I merely reciprocated
with your way of speaking to Me. If we are ultimately one, then neither of our statements
has any meaning.”
PURPORT
The  Absolute  Truth  is  one,  but  a  living  entity’s  material  body,  which  is  made  of
the five gross material elements, is different from other material bodies. The sages had
already seen their father worship the lotus feet of the Lord and so there was no need for
their question.
manasä vacasä dåñöyä gåhyate ‘nyair apéndriyaiù
aham eva na matto ‘nyad iti budhyadhvam aïjasä
Whatever is perceived by the mind and senses is nothing but a manifestation of Me.
This should be understood by an unbiased examination of the truth.
COMMENTARY
The Lord here explains that since everything is the expansion of His potency, He is
not different from anything. Nothing can exist separately from the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, and thus everything shares in the Lord’s nature.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is one without a second. Therefore, whatever one perceives with
his eyes and other senses must be considered in relationship with the Supreme Lord.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
guëeñv äviçate ceto guëäç cetasi ca prajäù
jévasya deha ubhayaà guëäç ceto mad-ätmanaù
My dear sons, the mind has the propensity to enter into material sense objects, and
material  sense  objects  enter  into  the  mind.  However,  both  the  mind  and  the  material
sense objects are designations that cover the pure spirit soul, who is My eternal part and
parcel.
COMMENTARY
The sons of Brahmä thought, “My dear Lord, if we are unintelligent, You definitely
stated that everything is a manifestation of You alone because everything is the expansion
of Your potency. It thus appears that there is an intimate relationship between the mind
and the objects of the senses. We simply want to ascertain how the mind can be detached
from the objects of the senses and please be merciful and enlighten us.”
The  Lord  replied,  “My  dear  sons,  what  you  say  is  very  true.  Although  the  living
entities  are  My  eternal  parts  and  parcels,  in  conditioned  life  they  artificially  identify
with the mind and thus become attracted to enjoy the objects of the senses. As long as
the soul identifies with the mind, desires for sense gratification will continue to harass
him. But, because the mind and sense objects actually have no conection with the soul,
they should be rejected. In this way, one can become free from the dualities of material
existence.”
PURPORT
The conditioned living entities in the material world are under the control of the
three  modes  of  material  nature,  whereas  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  being
eternally  liberated,  is  transcendental  to  the  three  modes  of  material  nature.  Material
sense  objects  enter  into  the  minds  of  the  conditioned  living  entities,  and  their  minds
run after the material sense objects.
guëeñu cäviçac cittam abhékñëaà guëa-sevayä
guëäç ca citta-prabhavä mad-rüpa ubhayaà tyajet
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
230 Chapter 7
One  who  has  thus  attained  Me,  understanding  that  he  is  not  different  from  Me,
realizes that the material mind is absorbed within the sense objects because of constant
sense  gratification,  and  that  the  material  objects  are  present  within  the  material  mind.
Having understood My transcendental nature, he gives up both the material mind and
its objects.
COMMENTARY
It  is  very  difficult  to  restrain  the  mind  from  the  object  of  the  senses,  because  of
the mind’s false ego. Becoming detached from the mind does not mean that one stops
thinking, but instead means that one must purify the mind of its material propensities
by  engaging  it  in  the  devotional  service  of  the  Lord.  It  is  practically  seen  that  the
objects  of  the  senses  enter  the  mind  at  every  moment,  as  if  flowing  in  a  continuous
stream. Considering this, how is it possible to detach the mind from thoughts of sense
gratification?  Such  an  endeavor  appears  to  be  an  attempt  to  deny  the  mind’s  very
existence. What is required is to engage the objects of the senses in the proper way—for
the  satisfaction  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  In  this  way,  there  will  be  no
harm of sense objects entering the mind because the intelligence will dictate that they
all be used in devotional service and not for personal enjoyment. There is no question of
artificial renunciation, which can serve no useful purpose. Without engagement in the
devotional service of the Lord, mere renunciation is of no lasting value.
PURPORT
While residing in this material world, one engages in the service of the three modes
of  material  nature.  It  is  the  modes  of  nature  that  capture  one’s  mind.  Therefore,  one
should  come  to  understand  how  the  individual  soul  and  the  Supersoul  are  both  fully
transcendental to the three modes of material nature.
jägrat svapnaù suñuptaà ca guëato buddhi-våttayaù
täsäà vilakñaëo jévaù säkñitvena viniçcitaù
The  three  functions  of  intelligence—wakefulness,  dreaming,  and  deep  sleep—are
caused by the three modes of material nature. It has been ascertained that the spirit soul
is the seer, and is completely aloof from these three states.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
COMMENTARY
Actually, the pure spirit soul has no relationship with material sense objects or the
materially contaminated mind. So, giving up the materially contaminated mind and the
material sense objects means to give up a misconception. The state of awakening is born
from the mode of goodness, the state of dreaming is born from the mode of passion, and
the  state  of  deep  sleep  is  born  from  the  mode  of  ignorance.  However,  the  pure  living
entity is beyond these three states of being, which are functions of the intelligence. The
living entity is actually aloof from them as a witness.
PURPORT
The three states of the living entity—wakefulness, dreaming, and deep sleep—which
are functions of the intelligence, are born from material modes of goodness, passion, and
ignorance,  respectively.  The  liberated  living  entity  is  actually  aloof  from  these  three
states, and is not under the control of the three modes of material nature. He is simply
a witness.
yarhi saàsåti-bandho ‘yam ätmano guëa-våtti-daù
mayi turye sthito jahyät tyägas tad guëa-cetasäm
Due  to  being  bound  by  material  intelligence,  a  conditioned  living  entity  is  dragged
towards  material  sense  enjoyment.  I  am  the  fourth  stage  of  consciousness,  beyond
wakefulness, dreaming and deep sleep and so you should become established in Me and
thus give up the bondage to material nature. In this way, you can automatically become
detached from the material sense objects and the mind.
COMMENTARY
Here  Lord  Kåñëa  answers  the  questions  that  the  sages  had  placed  before  Lord
Brahmä. In his constitutional position, the spirit soul has nothing to do with the objects
of the senses and the three modes of material nature. It is due to the conditioned soul’s
false  identification  with  the  material  body  that  the  modes  of  nature  engage  him  in
illusory activities. When this false identification is given up, the soul is freed from the
illusory engagements forced upon him by the modes of nature. The conditioned souls
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
232 Chapter 7
can free themselves from material bondage simply by their own endeavors. They must
surrender to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and depend upon His mercy.
PURPORT
Being enticed by the material sense objects, one falls into the bondage of material
existence.  In  his  constitutional  position,  the  spirit  soul  is  transcendental  to  the  three
modes of material nature, and when he separates himself from the influence of these
modes by becoming devoted to the Supreme Lord, he can be freed from all desires for
material enjoyment.
ahaìkära-kåtaà bandham ätmano ‘rtha-viparyayam
vidvän nirvidya saàsära-cintäà turye sthitas tyajet
The living entity has been placed in bondage by the false ego, which awards him the
opposite of what he had actually hoped for. Therefore, an intelligent person should give
up his constant anxiety to enjoy material life and remain situated in the Supreme Lord,
who exists beyond the functions of material consciousness.
COMMENTARY
A  living  entity’s  material  bondage  continues  as  long  as  he  remains  in  the  bodily
conception  of  life.  An  intelligent  person  should  understand  this  fact  very  carefully
and  then  become  detached  from  material  existence,  which  creates  many  unwanted
conditions, and which covers his constitutional nature of eternity, knowledge and bliss.
One who transfers his attention from the objects of the senses to the Lord will no longer
have to fear material existence.
PURPORT
The living entity becomes misguided from his real self-interest due to false ego. This
is  the  cause  of  material  entanglement.  One  who  takes  shelter  of  the  transcendental
Personality of Godhead will gradually lose interest in material life, so that he will remain
steady  on  the  transcendental  platform.  Being  thus  situated,  one  will  take  pleasure  in
cultivating Kåñëa consciousness because the taste for material enjoyment has slackened
due to an awakening of detachment within the heart. Devotional service to the Lord is
the platform of transcendence.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
yävan nänärtha-dhéù puàso na nivarteta yuktibhiù
jägarty api svapann ajïaù svapne jägaraëaà yathä
As instructed by Me, one should fix the mind on Me without deviation. If one continues
to have various objectives in life instead of seeing how everything can be dovetailed in My
devotional service, then although believing oneself to be awake, one is actually dreaming
due to lack of absorption on the transcendental platform, just as one may dream that one
has awakened while still sleeping.
COMMENTARY
Until  one  has  practically  become  detached  from  fruitive  activities  by  engagement
in  devotional  service,  his  life  of  sense  gratification  will  continue.  Although  he  may
accept some path of liberation, and thus consider himself to be “saved,” he will remain
in material existence. Such a person is certainly in illusion and is compared to one who
dreams that he has awakened, although he is still sleeping.
PURPORT
Those whose minds are absorbed in something other than the Supreme Lord, who
is  one  without a second,  will remain bound to material desires for sense gratification.
Although  such  a  person  may  have  some  understanding  of  his  conditioned  state  of
existence,  and  the  means  for  attaining  liberation,  and  thus  proudly  advertise  himself
as  a  liberated  soul,  he  will  remain  attached  on  the  material  platform.  While  sleeping,
one  may  dream  that  he  has  awakened,  although  this  is  not  a  fact.  Similarly,  one  may
understand the distinction between the body and the soul and thus think that he had
become liberated, while continuing to display all the symptoms of one who is absorbed
in materialistic life.
asattväd ätmano ‘nyeñäà bhävänäà tat-kåtä bhidä
gatayo hetavaç cäsya måñä svapna-dåço yathä
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
234 Chapter 7
Any condition of life that is thought to be separate from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead has no real existence, like something experienced in a dream. Just as a dreaming
person sees himself engaged in many different activities, the conditioned soul imagines
that he performs fruitive activities.
COMMENTARY
Although the Haàsa-avatära has condemned the conception of duality within the
material world, the Vedas have prescribed varëäçrama-dharma, which divides human
society according to occupational duties and spiritual statuses. How can these two things
be reconciled? The answer is given in this verse. The words anyeñäà bhävänäm refer not
to the Vedic understanding, but to conception of life concocted due to false identification
with the material body and mind. Of course, the divisions of the varëäçrama system are
also based on this illusion, but they are arranged in such a way as to gradually bring one
to  the  point  of  enlightenment  in  spiritual  understanding.  Being  the  Lord’s  creation,
this material world is not false, as imagined by some less-intelligent philosophers. This
world is real and the living entities are real, but the identification of the living entities
with this material world is false. The example is sometimes given of a rabbit with horns.
Rabbits  are  real  and  horns  are  real  but  the  sight  of  a  rabbit  with  horns  in  a  dream  is
illusion. Similarly, it is a kind of dream of the conditioned soul that he has a permanent
relationship with this material world.
PURPORT
An object that was seen in a dream does not influence a person when he is awake.
Similarly, when the living entity is liberated from material bondage, he no longer feels
obliged  to  follow  the  principles  of  varnäçrama,  which  are  born  from  attachment  to
the body, nor is he attracted to enjoying heavenly pleasure, which can be obtained by
performing the fruitive rituals mentioned in the Vedas.
yo jägare bahir anukñaëa-dharmiëo ‘rthän
bhuìkte samasta-karaëair hådi tat-sadåkñän
svapne suñupta upasaàharate sa ekaù
småty-anvayät tri-guëa-våtti-dåg indriyeçaù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
While  awake,  the  conditioned  souls  try  to  enjoy  the  fleeting  experiences  of  this
material world. While dreaming, he enjoys other illusory experiences within the mind,
and in deep sleep, all such experiences are forgotten. By understanding these three states
of  wakefulness,  dreaming,  and  deep  sleep,  the  conditioned  soul  can  realize  that  he  is
simply the witness and therefore transcendental.
COMMENTARY
One may first consider the three phases of consciousness mentioned above and then
understand  one’s  transcendental  position  as  spirit  soul.  One  experiences  childhood,
boyhood, adolescence, adulthood, middle age and old age, and throughout these phases,
one  is  experiencing  things  while  awake  and  while  dreaming.  The  living  entity  is  the
same person throughout all such changes. He is the silent spectator of the three stages
of  consciousness.  One  may  argue  that  it  is  actually  the  senses  that  experience  during
wakefulness and that it is the mind that experiences during dreams. However, the Lord
here  states,  indriyeçaù:  the  living  entity  is  actually  the  lord  of  the  senses  and  mind,
although temporarily he has become a victim of their influence. By Kåñëa consciousness,
one may resume one’s rightful position as the master of the mind and senses.
PURPORT
The  living  entity  experiences  three  stages  of  existence  in  the  material  world—
wakefulness,  dreaming,  and  deep  sleep.  While  awake,  the  senses  of  the  gross  body
are  active,  under  the  influence  of  time.  While  dreaming,  although  the  living  entity
is untouched by the objects of the senses, he remains affected by them on the mental
platform. In the state of deep sleep, the living entity forgets himself and the world.
evaà vimåçya guëato manasas try-avasthä
man-mäyayä mayi kåtä iti niçcitärthäù
saïchidya härdam anumäna-sad-ukti-tékñëa
jïänäsinä bhajata mäkhila-saàçayädhim
My dear sons, after carefully deliberating upon how these three mental states are born
from  the  three  modes  of  material  nature,  and  thus  created  by  My  illusory  energy,  you
should cut to pieces the false ego, which is the source of all doubts, with the sharpened
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
236 Chapter 7
sword of knowledge, acquired by logical reflection upon the instructions of the sages and
Vedic literatures. You should then worship Me, who am situated within the heart.
COMMENTARY
The three stages of the mind and intelligence are produced from the three modes of
material nature, which are creations of the Lord’s illusory energy, and thus have nothing
to  do  with  the  spirit  soul.  By  the  help  of  the  sharp  sword  of  knowledge,  acquired  by
logical analysis of the instructions of saintly persons and the çästra, one should destroy
all doubts and worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead with determination.
PURPORT
If  one  has  attained  spiritual  knowledge,  and  is  no  longer  influenced  by  the  three
stages  of  wakefulness,  dreaming,  and  deep  sleep,  he  vanquishes  the  spirit  of  sense
enjoyment that had been directed by his materially conditioned mind, intelligence, and
false ego, and engages in the devotional service of the Lord, so that all his doubts will
be removed.
ékñeta vibhramam idaà manaso viläsaà
dåñöaà vinañöam ati-lolam aläta-cakram
vijïänam ekam urudheva vibhäti mäyä
svapnas tridhä guëa-visarga-kåto vikalpaù
One  should  see  that  the  objects  of  this  world  are  an  illusion  appearing  within  the
mind, because material objects are temporarily manifested. They can be compared to the
streaking red line created by whirling a blazing stick on fire. The spirit soul by nature
exists in the single state of pure consciousness. However, in this world, the soul appears
in many different forms and stages of existence. The modes of nature divide the soul’s
consciousness into wakefulness, dreaming, and deep sleep. All such varieties of perception,
however, are actually Maya and exist only like a dream.
COMMENTARY
After realizing that the spirit soul is distinct from the three stages of consciousness,
one  should  carefully  perceive  how  everything  in  this  material  world  is  illusory.  One
should give up the misconceptions of “I” and “Mine” with regards to this material world.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The conditioned soul has maintained this false misconception since time immemorial.
That is why the mind is restless, making it appear like a wheel of fire. Now, the question
may be raised, “If one has a vision of duality, how can he realize the Absolute Truth?
The answer is, “The Absolute Truth is one but He appears to be many. The three stages
of consciousness are created by the Lord’s illusory energy, and so are temporary, like a
dream.”
PURPORT
The  three  states  of  wakefulness,  dreaming,  and  deep  sleep,  which  are  born  from
the  three  modes  of  material  nature,  are  actually  illusory,  and  are  only  temporary
manifestations. In the philosophy of the Mäyävädés, these temporary manifestations are
addressed  as  false.  This  understanding  is  false,  however,  because  these  manifestations
are not false, but temporary. Until a living entity appreciates the sublime nature of the
eternal spiritual pastimes of the supremely conscious person and the minutely conscious
persons, his heart will remain enraptured by the mundane duality of material enjoyment
and detachment.
When  the  remembrance  of  Kåñëa’s  pastimes  is  awakened  in  the  heart  of  a  living
entity, his propensity for enjoyment or renunciation is destroyed and his propensity for
eternal service to the Supreme Lord is awakened.
dåñöim tataù pratinivartya nivåtta-tåñëas
tüñëéà bhaven nija-sukhänubhavo niréhaù
sandåçyate kva ca yadédam avastu-buddhyä
tyaktaà bhramäya na bhavet småtir ä-nipätät
With the understanding of the temporary and illusory nature of the material world,
and having pulled one’s vision away from illusion, you should remain free from desires
for  material  enjoyment.  By  experiencing  the  happiness  of  the  soul,  you  should  give  up
material speaking and activities. Even if you must be involved in material activities, like
eating, you should remember that it is not ultimate reality, and that you have renounced
it. By constantly living in this way, right up to the point of death, you will  not again fall
into illusion.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
238 Chapter 7
COMMENTARY
The  Lord  said,  “Because  the  visible  material  world  is  illusory,  and  thus  miserable,
you should withdraw your vision from it and give up all desires for sense gratification.
You should curtail material activities and talks of material subjects. You should simply
take pleasure in the self within, knowing that this will free you from material bondage.”
Now, the question may arise, “It is impossible for an embodied soul to remain free from
dealing with the external world and so will never become freed from material existence?”
The answer is, “Even while performing activities of the material body, such as eating,
this will not be the cause of illusion if one has given up the material conception of life,
with the help of his intelligence.” Therefore, until one gives up his body at the time of
death, one should continue to treat material objects with a mood of detachment.
PURPORT
One who has attained the human form of life should not utilize material gain for
gratifying  his  senses.  There  is  no  need  to  strive  for  material  happiness,  just  as  there
is no point in endeavoring for distress. One should instead try to satisfy the Supreme
Personality of Godhead by his execution of devotional service. One who is fully engaged
in the devotional service of the Lord can understand that all kinds of material attachment
simply increase material illusion. Step by step, one should detach himself from matter by
fully attaching himself to the devotional service of the Lord.
dehaà ca naçvaram avasthitam utthitaà vä
siddho na paçyati yato ‘dhyagamat svarüpam
daiväd apetam atha daiva-vaçäd upetaà
väso yathä parikåtaà madirä-madändhaù
Just as a drunkard does not know whether his clothes have fallen off, or if he is still
wearing them, a self-realized soul does not notice whether his temporary body is seated
on an äsana, standing, or walking about.
COMMENTARY
In  these  two  verses,  the  condition  of  a  liberated  soul  is  described.  When  one  has
realized  Brahman,  he  does  not  notice  whether  he  is  sitting,  standing  or  walking.  The
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
example is given of an intoxicated person. He is so absorbed in himself by the influence
of wine that he hardly notices even if his clothes fall off, or somebody is dressing him.
PURPORT
A self realized person has no interest in the enjoyable objects of this material world.
Because he is situated in his eternal constitutional position, he sees that his temporary
body and restless mind are products of matter and thus he always remains engaged in
the  transcendental  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  As  a  drunkard  does  not  care  about
the  state  of  his  clothing,  a  self-realized  soul  is  indifferent  to  and  forgetful  of  material
enjoyment.
deho ‘pi daiva-vaça-gaù khalu karma yävat
svärambhakaà pratisamékñata eva säsuù
taà sa-prapaïcam adhirüòha-samädhi-yogaù
sväpnaà punar na bhajate pratibuddha-vastuù
This  material  body,  which  certainly  moves  by  the  arrangement  of  providence,  will
certainly continue to exist, along with the life-air and senses, as long as one’s karma is in
effect. One who has attained absorption in the Lord through samädhi, and who is fixed in
the absolute reality, will never again surrender to the material body and its manifestations,
knowing it to be just like a body seen in a dream.
COMMENTARY
As long as one is destined to enjoy the results of his karma, one continues to remain
within  the  material  body,  along  with  the  life-air.  The  question  may  arise,  “If  a  self-
realized  soul  gives  proper  attention  to  the  maintenance  of  his  body,  won’t  he  again
become  attached  to  it?”  Lord  Kåñëa  herein  states  that  one  who  is  highly  elevated  in
Kåñëa consciousness, having understood Lord Kåñëa to be the actual reality, never again
surrenders  to  the  illusory  identification  with  the  material  body,  which  is  just  like  the
body seen in a dream.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
240 Chapter 7
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord alone is the eternal object of all kinds of relationships. As eternal
servants of the Lord, His pure devotees, even while situated with their material bodies,
do  not  forget  Him.  They  do  not  become  attached  to  the  temporary  activities  of  the
insignificant states of awakening, dreaming, and deep sleep, because their only object of
worship is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
mayaitad uktaà vo viprä guhyaà yat säìkhya-yogayoù
jänéta mägataà yajïaà yuñmad-dharma-vivakñayä
My dear brähmaëas, I have thus explained the confidential understanding of Säìkhya
and  añöäì ga-yoga.  You  should  understand  that  I  am  Lord  Viñëu,  having  come  here  to
instruct you about your actual religious duties.
COMMENTARY
To  strengthen  their  faith  in  His  teachings,  the  Lord  said:  “My  dear  brähmaëas,
Säìkhya, or the science of the self, and astäìga-yoga, the process of linking with the
Supreme, have thus been revealed to you. In the future, it will be remembered that Lord
Mädhava, in the form of Haàsa, instructed Brahmä and his sons.”
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord said: “I am the Supreme Absolute Truth and I have come here
to reveal the confidential understandings that were incomprehensible to the misguided
preachers of Säìkhya and Vedänta. I am the object of everyone’s worship, the supreme
instructor, and that which is to be known.”
ahaà yogasya säìkhyasya satyasyartasya tejasaù
paräyaëaà dvija-çreñöhäù çriyaù kérter damasya ca
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
O  best  of  brähmaëas,  please  know  that  I  am  the  ultimate  shelter  of  Säìkhya,  the
yoga system, truthfulness, influence, opulence, fame, and self-control.
COMMENTARY
The sons of Brahmä were astonished by the presentation of the Supreme Personality
of  Godhead.  They  thought,  “What  wonderful  instructions  we  have  just  heard.”  The
Supreme Lord thus said to them, “O best of the brähmaëas, I am the supreme shelter of
Säìkhya yoga, truthfulness, equanimity, prowess, and influence.”
PURPORT
The Lord said, “I am the ultimate goal of the various systems of abhidheya followed
by the different sects.”
mäà bhajanti guëäù sarve nirguëaà nirapekñakam
suhådaà priyam ätmänaà sämyäsaìgädayo ‘guëäù
The  best  of  all  transcendental  qualities,  such  as  being  transcendentally  situated,
detached from matter, the well-wisher of everyone, the most dear Supersoul of all living
beings,  equally  disposed  everywhere,  and  eternally  liberated,  are  found  in  Me,  their
worshipable Lord.
COMMENTARY
Because Lord Kåñëa has been describing His own nature, the sons of Brahmä might
doubt that He has become proud, which is a material quality. Understanding this, the
Lord clarifies His position in the present verse.
The Lord said, “My body is not material, made of the five gross elements like that
of  the  conditioned  souls.  My  body  is  completely  spiritual—eternal,  full  of  knowledge,
and full of bliss. Indeed, the transcendental qualities worship Me.” The Lord is called
nirapekñakam because He is never attached to material enjoyment, like the conditioned
souls. Because He is the best well-wishing friend of His devotees, He is called suhådam.
The  word  priyam  indicates  that  the  Lord  is  the  supreme  lovable  person  and  thus  has
affectionate  relationships  with  His  devotees.  The  word  sämya  indicates  that  the  Lord
reains  neutral,  even  while  situtated  within  the  turmoil  of  the  material  world.  It  is
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
242 Chapter 7
therefore  concluded  that  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  is  the  reservoir  of  all
transcendental qualities.
Çrédhara Svämé has also confirmed that the qualities of the Lord are transcendental
and eternal. In the first canto it is also described that all the personal characteristics of
the Lord are eternally present in His form because there is no difference between the
Lord and His body. This is also confirmed in the Vedas as follows:
na tasya käryaà karaëaà ca vidyate na tat-samaç cäbhyadhikaç ca dåçyate
paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate sväbhäviké jïäna-bala-kriyä ca
“The Supreme Brahman has no material senses. He has nothing to do, and
there is no one equal to or greater than Him. Everything is performed naturally
and systematically by His multifarious energies.” (Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 6.8)
PURPORT
The  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  said:  Do  not  come  to  a  conclusion  of
impersonalism  because  it  is  sometimes  stated  that  I  am  devoid  of  qualities.  I  possess
all  transcendental  qualities,  I  am  situated  beyond  the  modes  of  material  nature,  I  am
the best well-wisher of My devotees, I am the shelter of all, and I am the ultimate goal
of  everyone.  Transcendental  qualities,  such  as  equanimity,  and  freedom  from  bad
association, are eternally present in Me. I cannot be understood by those who are in the
bodily concept of life.
iti me chinna-sandehä munayaù sanakädayaù
sabhäjayitvä parayä bhaktyägåëata saàstavaiù
Lord  Kåñëa  continued:  My  dear  Uddhava,  all  the  doubts  of  the  sages,  headed  by
Sanaka, were thus destroyed by My words. They then worshiped Me with loving devotion
and glorified Me by offering transcendental prayers.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Lord said, “My dear Uddhava, having received My instructions, the
sages, headed by Sanaka, became freed from all doubts and so they lovingly offered Me
prayers and worship.”
PURPORT
Those who are detached from material enjoyment have no doubts whatsoever. The
sages, headed by Sanaka, attained that transcendental platform and offered prayers and
worship to the Lord.
tair ahaà püjitaù saàyak saàstutaù paramarñibhiù
pratyeyäya svakaà dhäma paçyataù parameñöhinaù
The sages, headed by Sanaka Åñi, worshiped and glorified Me to their full satisfaction.
Then, as Brahmä and his sons looked on, I departed for My own abode.
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Lord said, “After I was worshiped and glorified by the great sages, I
returned to My own abode, as Brahmä looked on.”
Thus ends the translation of the seventh chapter of the Uddhava-géta entitled “The
Haàsa-avatära Answers the Questions of the Sons of Brahmä” with the commentaries
of  Çréla  Viçvanätha  Cakravarté  Öhäkura  and  chapter  summary  and  purports  by  Çréla
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 8
Lord Kåñëa exPLaIns the yoga system to Çré uddhava
CHAPTER SUMMARY
In  this  chapter,  Lord  Kåñëa  explains  to  Uddhava  that  devotional  service  is  the
topmost sädhana. He also speaks about the process of meditation.
Çré Uddhava wanted to know which is the best process for achieving the ultimate
goal of life, and he also wanted to hear the superexcellence of pure devotional service.
The Supreme Lord replied to him by explaining how the religious duties prescribed in
the Vedas had been lost at the time of the previous annihilation. At the beginning of
the  new  creation,  the  Supreme  Lord  instructed  these  religious  principles  to  Brahmä.
Brahmä repeated it to Manu, Manu spoke it to the sages, headed by Bhågu, who in turn
instructed  these  eternal  religious  duties  to  the  demigods  and  demons.  Because  of  the
living entities’ varieties of material desires, religious principles were elaborately explained
in different ways. Thus, different philosophies came into being, including some atheistic
doctrines. Because the living entity, bewildered by illusion, is incapable of ascertaining
his  eternal  benefit,  he  mistakenly  identifies  ordinary  vows  of  penance,  austerity,  etc.,
to be the ultimate spiritual practice. But, the actual means of achieving happiness is to
renounce  material  desires  and  become  self-satisfied  by  surrendering  everything  at  the
lotus feet of the Supreme Lord. This drives away selfish desires for sense gratification
and liberation.
The Lord then described the superior process of devotional service, which destroys
countless  sinful  reactions  and  produces  many  ecstatic  transformations,  such  as  the
standing  of  the  bodily  hairs  on  end.  Pure  devotion,  having  the  power  to  purify  the
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
246 Chapter 8
heart, enables one to achieve the association of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and because the devotee is very dear to the Lord and is always close to Him, he is able in
turn to purify the entire universe. Pious activities, such as giving charity and observing
religious vows do not have that potency. By virtue of his unflinching devotion to the
Lord, the devotee can never be completely diverted by the objects of sense enjoyment,
even  if  he  is  not  able  to  gain  control  over  his  senses  in  the  beginning.  One  desiring
to attain the perfection of life is advised to give up all material processes of elevation,
as  well  as  the  association  of  women.  He  should  then  merge  his  mind  constantly  in
thought of Lord Kåñëa. Finally, the Lord instructed Çré Uddhava about the true object
of meditation.
´Î3{H 3HÌ=
çré-uddhava uväca
vadanti kåñëa çreyäàsi bahüni brahma-vädinaù
teñäà vikalpa-prädhänyam utäho eka-mukhyatä
Çré  Uddhava  said:  My  dear  Kåñëa,  learned  sages  who  explain  the  Vedic  literature
recommend a variety of processes for achieving the ultimate goal of life. Considering the
variety of viewpoints, kindly explain to me whether all of them are equally important, or
if only one of them is supreme.
COMMENTARY
In this chapter, the supremacy of devotional service, which brings Çré Kåñëa under
control,  and  the  method  by  which  devotees  who  desire  liberation  meditate  upon  the
Supreme Lord are described.
PURPORT
Çré Uddhava requests further clarification regarding what he has already heard from
the  Lord.  He  also  wishes  for  the  Lord  to  clearly  state  what  is  the  foremost  sädhana.
Uddhava  said,  “The  sages  who  know  Brahman  have  propounded  various  paths  for
attaining the perfection of life. Please tell me which of those sädhanas is best and most
effective.”
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa Explains the Yoga System to ÇréUddhava
bhavatodähåtaù svämin bhakti-yogo ‘napekñitaù
nirasya sarvataù saìgaà yena tvayy äviçen manaù
My dear Lord, You have clearly explained the process of unalloyed devotional service,
by which one can free himself from all material association, thus enabling him to fix his
mind on You without deviation.
COMMENTARY
In this chapter it is firmly established that pure devotional service is the superexcellent
process for absorbing the mind in the Absolute Truth, Lord Kåñëa. Next, the question
will be raised whether everyone can engage in devotional service, or is such a practice
limited to a select few.
PURPORT
The  mind  is  very  unsteady,  and  so  by  utilizing  one’s  good  intelligence,  one  must
remain firmly fixed in devotional service so that one can ultimately attain the association
of the Supreme Lord in His transcendental abode. This is the only intention of Lord
Kåñëa’s speaking with Çré Uddhava.
çré-bhagavän uväca
kälena nañöä pralaye väëéyaà veda-saàjïitä
mayädau brahmaëe proktä dharmo yasyäà mad-ätmakaù
The Supreme Lord said: In the course of time, Vedic knowledge appeared to be lost at
the time of annihilation. Then, when the universe was recreated, I again imparted Vedic
knowledge to Brahmä because I am the religious principles personified.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
248 Chapter 8
COMMENTARY
The  Supreme  Lord  said:  “O  Uddhava,  I  am  the  reservoir  of  all  pleasure,  and  My
devotees directly engage under the direction of My hlädiné, or pleasure-giving, potency.
Somehow or other, one must fix one’s mind upon Me, and that is not possible without
devotional  service.  One  who  has  not  developed  his  attraction  for  Me  cannot  restrain
the senses from inferior engagements. Since other Vedic processes do not actually award
Me to the practitioner, they cannot offer the highest benefit in life. The transcendental
sound  of  the  Vedas  is  itself  the  highest  evidence,  but  one  whose  senses  and  mind  are
entangled  in  sense  gratification  and  mental  speculation,  and  whose  heart  is  therefore
covered  by  material  dust,  cannot  directly  receive  the  transcendental  Vedic  message.
Thus one cannot appreciate the exalted position of My devotional service.”
PURPORT
The transcendental objective is distinct from the objects enjoyed by material senses,
and is realized by the reception of transcendental sound vibration. In the conditional
state of existence, a living entity is not capable of appreciating the transcendental sound
vibration of the Vedas. Four-headed Brahmä was instructed by the Supreme Lord about
the  supreme  religious  principles  but  for  those  who  are  attached  to  sense  gratification,
bhägavata dharma is not easily understood.
tena proktä sva-puträya manave pürva-jäya sä
tato bhågv-ädayo ‘gåhëan sapta brahma-maharñayaù
Lord Brahmä instructed this Vedic knowledge to his eldest son, Manu, who in turn
instructed it to the seven great sages, headed by Bhågu.
TEXTS 5-7
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa Explains the Yoga System to ÇréUddhava
tebhyaù pitåbhyas tat-puträ deva-dänava-guhyakäù
manuñyäù siddha-gandharväù sa-vidyädhara-cäraëäù
kindeväù kinnarä nägä rakñaù-kimpuruñädayaù
bahvyas teñäà prakåtayo rajaù-sattva-tamo-bhuvaù
yäbhir bhütäni bhidyante bhütänäà patayas tathä
yathä-prakåti sarveñäà citrä väcaù sravanti hi
From  the  forefathers,  headed  by  Bhågu  Muni  and  other  sons  of  Brahmä,  appeared
many  children  and  descendants,  who  assumed  different  forms  as  demigods,  demons,
human  beings,  Guhyakas,  Siddhas,  Gandharvas,  Vidyädharas,  Cäraëas,  Kindevas,
Kinnaras, Nägas, Kimpuruñas, and so on. All of the many universal species, along with
their respective leaders, appeared with different natures and desires generated from the
three modes of material nature. Therefore, because of the different natures and desires of
the living entities within the universe, different statements regarding religious principles
have come into existence.
COMMENTARY
Many people wonder why the Vedic literatures recommend so many different paths
of  advancement.  The  answer  is  given  herein.  Bhågu,  Maréci,  Atri,  Aìgirä,  Pulastya,
Pulaha, and Kratu are the seven great sages within the universe. The Kindevas are a race
of human beings who are, like the demigods, are without fatigue, perspiration, and body
odor. One might wonder, kià deväù, “Are they demigods?” They are a species of human
beings  that  reside  on  another  planet  within  the  universe.  The  Kinnaras  are  so  called
this  because,  kiïcin  naräù,  they  are  “something  like  human  beings.”  The  Kimpuruñas
also resemble human beings and so it might be asked, kià puruñäù: “Are these human
beings?” They are a species of monkeys that are something like human beings. Why are
there  various  paths  recommended  in  the  Vedas?  Because  people  have  various  desires
due to being under the clutches of the three modes of material nature. Hence, there are
different religious systems.
PURPORT
According to the degree of aversion to the Supreme Lord, Vedic mantras have taken
various  shapes  to  fulfill  the  desires  of  sense  enjoyers.  Thus,  the  proliferation  of  Vedic
processes  indicates  only  the  variety  of  material  illusion  and  not  a  variety  of  ultimate
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
250 Chapter 8
purpose.  The  ultimate  purpose  of  many  paths  recommended  in  the  Vedas  is  one—to
revive one’s forgotten relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
evaà prakåti-vaicitryäd bhidyante matayo nåëäm
päramparyeëa keñäïcit päñaëòa-matayo ‘pare
Thus, due to the great variety of desires among human beings, various philosophies
have come into existence. These philosophies have been handed down through tradition,
custom,  and  disciplic  succession.  There  are  other  teachers  who  present  atheistic
philosophies.
COMMENTARY
The word päramparyeëa means “through disciplic succession.” Atheistic philosophies
are meant for those who are very foolish and opposed to the purport of the Vedas. Neem
trees, tamarind trees, and poisonous trees are situated on the banks of the river Ganges.
Although they drink the pure and sweet water of the Ganges through their roots, they
produce bitter, sour, or poisonous fruit. Similarly, those who are atheistic or demoniac
utilize Vedic knowledge to produce bitter or poisonous fruit in the form of atheistic or
materialistic philosophies. This is the purport of this verse.
PURPORT
While  viewing  the  variegatedness  of  the  material  world,  materialistic  people  are
distracted  from  the  understanding  of  the  eternal  truth.  Following  in  the  footsteps
of  atheistic  philosophers,  many  unfortunate  people  are  misguided  and  thus  miss  the
opportunity  afforded  by  the  human  form  of  life.  Acceptance  of  principles  that  are
contrary to the Vedas is a prime example of misfortune.
man-mäyä-mohita-dhiyaù puruñäù puruñarñabha
çreyo vadanty anekäntaà  yathä-karma yathä-ruci
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa Explains the Yoga System to ÇréUddhava
O  best  among  men,  the  intelligence  of  human  beings  is  bewildered  by  My  illusory
energy and thus, according to their inclinations, they propagate various means for attaining
what they feel to be the ultimate good.
COMMENTARY
The word anekänta means “different kinds.”
PURPORT
According to one’s individual way of doing things (yathä-karma) and one’s personal
preference  (yathä-ruci),  one  speaks  to  others  about  what  is  good  for  them.  Everyone
thinks,  “What  is  good  for  me  is  good  for  everyone.”  Sometimes  people  worship  five
demigods  for  the  fulfillment  of  their  desires,  and  sometimes  they  become  intoxicated
by the philosophy of impersonalism. Thus, in various ways, people view life from their
limited perspectives and fail to understand that service to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is the ultimate goal of life. Some of them pose as spiritual masters, and some of
them assume the role of disciples. In this way, they fall into an ocean of anarthas because
of their lack of attachment for spiritual life, being bereft of the Lord’s devotional service.
Being without sädhu-saìga, they are unable to properly worship the Supreme Lord and
this induces them to accept more and more anarthas. The person who has no faith in
the Supreme Lord, who has no sädhu-saìga, and does not worship the Lord, is certainly
full of anarthas. Being mad after material enjoyment, they have no taste for spiritual life
and are thus denied the opportunity of realizing the Absolute Truth.
dharmam eke yaçaç cänye kämaà satyaà damaà çamam
anye vadanti svärthaà vä aiçvaryaà tyäga-bhojanam
kecid yajïaà tapo dänaà vratäni niyamän yamän
Some say that happiness is obtained as the result of performing pious activities. Others
say that fame, sense gratification, speaking the truth, control of the senses, peacefulness,
fulfilling  one’s  self  interest,  political  influence,  wealth,  detachment,  performance  of
sacrifice and austerities, giving in charity, the observance of vows, or the performance of
one’s occupationsl duties are the causes of happiness.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
252 Chapter 8
COMMENTARY
The  karma-mémäàsakas  say  that  one  should  not  waste  time  worrying  about  a
kingdom of God that no one has ever seen and from which no one has ever returned.
Rather, one should expertly utilize the laws of karma, performing fruitive activities in
such a way that one will always be well situated. The authors of the kävya and alaìkära
literatures say that as long as the glories of a person is sung in this world, he will be able
to enjoy life in the heavenly planets for thousands of years. Sages like Vätsäyana preach
the fulfillment of lusty desires to be the objective of life. Others propagate the idea that
truthfulness, self-control, and peacefulness are the essence of religion. The materialists
say that the accumulation of wealth is one’s true self-interest. According to the followers
of Cäraväka, eating voraciously is the true religion. The followers of the Vedas say that
the performance of sacrifice and austerities, and observance of vows are the activities of
religion. Those who are advocates of the practice of yoga say that controlling the mind
and senses is their religion.
PURPORT
Generally,  people  conclude  that  religiosity,  economic  development,  and  sense
gratification, are life’s true objectives. The quest for fame is a kind of happiness enjoyed on
the mental platform, and is certainly illusory. There are many people who advocate that
peace can be attained by remaining aloof from the intoxication of material enjoyment.
Materialists become absorbed in the attainment of prosperity, ascetics become obsessed
with  rejecting  material  prosperity,  while  others  are  concerned  by  accumulating  huge
stocks of grains and other food items, but these are all anarthas.
ädy-anta-vanta evaiñäà lokäù karma-vinirmitäù
duùkhodarkäs tamo-niñöhäù kñudrä mandäù çucärpitäù
These  people  obtain  the  temporary  results  of  their  work.  Indeed,  the  meager  and
miserable situations they achieve simply award them unhappiness, because they are based
on ignorance. Even while enjoying the fruits of their labor, such persons are constantly
filled with lamentation.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa Explains the Yoga System to ÇréUddhava
COMMENTARY
Although  materialistic  people  consider  the  fruits  of  their  karma  to  be  desirable,
their lives are based on illusion and thus they always meet with frustration.
PURPORT
Those  who  simply  work  hard  to  possess  the  temporary  things  of  this  world,
considering  them  to  be  all  in  all,  are  not  actually  intelligent  because  such  endeavors
keep one in constant anxiety. Material nature is infinitely mutable, so that no position
in this world is permanent.
mayy arpitätmanaù sabhya nirapekñasya sarvataù
mayätmanä sukhaà yat tat kutaù syäd viñayätmanäm
O saintly Uddhava, My all-blissful form manifests in the heart of one who has freed
himself  from  all  desires  for  sense  gratification,  and  who  is  fully  surrendered  unto  Me.
The  happiness  he  enjoys  in  My  association  cannot  be  compared  to  the  happiness  one
experiences by gratification of the senses.
COMMENTARY
Devotional  service  to  the  Lord  is  the  actual  purport  of  the  Vedas.  The  Supreme
Lord said, “My devotees take great pleasure in relishing My transcendental forms and
qualities. The jïänés, who make great endeavors to control their mind, are not purified
and so they are unable to attain My lotus feet.”
This is confirmed by Närada Muné:
kià vä yogena säìkhyena nyäsa-svädhyäyayor api
kià vä çreyobhir anyaiç ca na yaträtma-prado hariù
Transcendental practices that do not ultimately help one realize the Supreme
Personality of Godhead are useless; be they mystic yoga practices, the analytical
study of matter, severe austerity, the acceptance of sannyäsa, or the study of Vedic
literature.  All  these  may  be  very  important  aspects  of  spiritual  advancement,
but unless one understands the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, all these
processes are useless.” (Çrémad-Bhägavatam 4.31.12)
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
254 Chapter 8
PURPORT
Those who have realized that this material world is a place of temporary enjoyment
and  have  thus  employed  all  their  senses  in  the  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  remain
situated  on  the  platform  of  eternal  happiness.  Since  material  pleasure  cannot  entice
them, they always remain devoted to the Lord’s service.
akiïcanasya däntasya çäntasya sama-cetasaù
mayä santuñöa-manasaù sarväù sukha-mayä diçaù
One who does not desire anything of this world, and who is peaceful, self-controlled,
always equal to everyone, and self-satisfied, finds only happiness wherever he goes.
COMMENTARY
A devotee who is always meditating upon Lord Kåñëa experiences transcendental
sound,  touch,  form,  flavor,  and  aroma  by  means  of  transcendental  senses.  This  is  due
to the causeless mercy of Lord Kåñëa, upon whom ones mind and senses are completely
engaged.  Such  a  person  finds  only  happiness  wherever  he  goes.  When  a  very  wealthy
man travels all over the world, wherever he may stay, he will enjoy the same luxurious
standard of comfort. Similarly, one who is advanced in Kåñëa consciousness constantly
experiences  transcendental  happiness  because  Lord  Kåñëa  is  all-pervading.  The  word
kiïcana indicates the so-called enjoyable things of this world. One who is akiïcana has
correctly understood that material sense gratification is simply the glare of illusion, and
therefore such a person is däntasya, or self-controlled, çäntasya, or peaceful, and mayä
santuñöa-manasaù,  or  completely  satisfied  with  his  transcendental  experience  of  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
Those who are capable of controlling their senses, who are not bewildered by material
desires,  who  do  not  consider  anyone  as  inferior  to  them,  who  are  always  satisfied  in
whichever condition they are put into by the Supreme Lord, and who have no inclination
to possess anything of this material world, can experience happiness everywhere. In this
regard, one should carefully consider this verse from Çré Caitanya-candrämåtaà (5) by
Prabhodänanda Sarasvaté:
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa Explains the Yoga System to ÇréUddhava
kaivalyaà narakäyate tridaça-pür äkäça puñpäyate
durdäntendriya käla-sarpa-paöalé proökhäta-daàsträyate
vidhi-mahendrädiç ca kéöäyate viçvaà pürnaà-sukhäyate
yat kärunya-katäkña vaibhavavätaà gauram eva stumaù
For those who have attained the merciful sidelong glance of Lord Caitanya,
impersonal liberation becomes as palatable as going to hell, the heavenly cities of
the demigods become as enticing as flowers imagined to be floating in the sky,
the  poisonous  fangs  of  the  untameable  black  snakes  of  the  senses  are  broken,
the whole world becomes full of joy, and Brahmä, Indra, and all the other great
demigods  become  as  insignificant  as  tiny  insects.  Let  us  glorify  that  golden-
complexioned Lord Caitanya.
na pärameñöhyaà na mahendra-dhiñëyaà na särvabhaumaà na rasädhipatyam
na yoga-siddhér apunar-bhavaà vä mayy arpitätmecchati mad vinänyat
A  pure  devotee  whose  life  is  dedicated  to  Me  has  no  desire  for  even  the  position
of  Brahmä  or  Indra,  and  so  what  to  speak  of  becoming  a  lord  of  this  world,  or  of  the
lower planets. He is not interested in achieving the perfections of mystic yoga, nor even
liberation from the cycle of birth and death, because his life is simply dedicated to Me.
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Lord said, “One who is surrendered to Me does not want the position of
Brahmä, nor the happiness of merging into the existence of Brahman. ‘As one surrenders
unto Me, I reward him accordingly.’ From this statement of Mine, one can understand
how My thoughts remain absorbed in My devotees. A devotee who desires nothing other
than Me lives in My association and thus relishes transcendental mellows.”
PURPORT
The pure devotee of the Lord has no desire other than to render devotional service.
He does not cherish anything else, not even the position of Brahmä or Indra, the domain
of the whole world, sovereignty over the lower planets, material opulence, the eight types
of mystic perfections, or freedom from the cycle of birth and death.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
256 Chapter 8
na tathä me priyatama ätma-yonir na çaìkaraù
na ca saìkarñaëo na çrér naivätmä ca yathä bhavän
My dear Uddhava, neither Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva, Lord Saìkarñaëa, the goddess of
fortune, nor even My own self is as dear to Me as you are.
COMMENTARY
If  someone  were  to  ask  the  Lord,  “How  dear  is  Your  devotee  to  you?”  the  reply
is  given  in  this  verse.  The  Lord  says,  “Brahmä  is  My  son,  Çaìkara  is  My  expansion
and My friend, Saìkarñaëa is My brother, and Lakñàédevé is My wife and yet, none of
them,  and  not  even  My  own  self,  is  as  dear  to  Me  as  you  are.  My  dear  Uddhava,  you
are My devotee and so you are most dear to Me.”  This is also confirmed by Çrédhara
Svämi. Although personalities like Brahmä are also the Lord’s devotees, they are placed
in  responsible  positions  and  thus  are  not  exactly  like  the  fully  surrendered  devotees.
The Lord gives preference to a helpless devotee who depends completely on His mercy.
The only way to obtain the Lord’s mercy is through His causeless love, and the Lord is
most lovingly inclined toward those devotees who are most dependent on Him, just as
ordinary mothers and fathers worry more about their helpless children than about those
who are self-sufficient. Because personalities like Brahmä have a sense of their unique
identity and position, they had not been addressed here as devotees. This is not the case
with personalities like Nanda and Yaçodä. Although they were parents of the Supreme
Lord, they acted as His great devotees and thus were very dear to Him. In His pastimes,
we invariably see that the Lord is fully controlled by His devotees. This is confirmed in
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.9.20),
nemam viriïco na bhavo na çrér apy aìga saàçrayä
prasädaà lebhire gopé yat tat präpa vimuktidät
The Supreme Lord, who can award liberation to anyone, showed more mercy
toward the gopés than to Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva, or even the goddess of fortune,
who is His own wife and is associated with His body.
It may appear from this verse that among all the devotees, Uddhava is the best but
the  gopés  are  even  superior  to  Uddhava.  The  dust  from  the  lotus  feet  of  gopés  is  even
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa Explains the Yoga System to ÇréUddhava
superior to the gopés themselves and so that is what Çré Uddhava had hoped to receive.
This is the Vaiñëava conclusion.
PURPORT
Pure devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are most dear to Him, even
more than personalities like Brahmä, Çiva, Saìkarñaëa, and Lakñmé.
nirapekñaà munià çäntaà nirvairaà sama-darçanam
anuvrajämy ahaà nityaà püyeyety aìghri-reëubhiù
Thinking that I will purify the entire universe with the dust from their lotus feet, I
always follow in the footstep of My devotees, who are free from material desires, rapt in
thought of My pastimes, peaceful, non-envious, and equal to all living entities.
COMMENTARY
Lord Kåñëa is the all-powerful creator of the universe, beyond the dualities of material
existence,  and  thus  for  Him  there  is  no  conception  of  purity  or  impurity.  Still,  it  has
been seen that sometimes the Lord desires to take the dust of the lotus feet of His pure
devotees upon His head. It is the statement of the scriptures that without receiving the
dust of the lotus feet of the pure devotees, one cannot attain the perfection of liberation
from  material  exiastence.  Lord  Kåñëa  considered,  “I  have  made  it  the  rule  that  one
can  experience  transcendental  happiness  only  as  a  result  advancement  in  devotional
service, which is achieved by receiving the dust of the lotus feet of My devotees. Because
I also desire to experience transcendental ecstasy, I accept the dust of My devotees’ lotus
feet.” This is the purport of this verse.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead sends His devotees into this world of material
enjoyment  for  the  benefit  of  the  fallen,  conditioned  souls.  By  observing  the  external
behavior  of  the  devotees,  it  is  seen  that  they  are  detached,  introspective,  peaceful,
friendly, and equipoised. The devotees of the Lord never engage in idle talks, they are
the friends of all living entities, and they are equal to everyone. However, non-devotees
cannot understand the plans and activities of the pure devotees.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
258 Chapter 8
niñkiïcanä mayy anurakta-cetasaù çäntä mahänto ‘khila-jéva-vatsaläù
kämair anälabdha-dhiyo juñanti te yan nairapekñyaà na viduù sukhaà mama
Those with no material possessions, who are peaceful, free from pride, affectionate
to all living entities, and have no desire for personal gratification, and who serve Me with
undivided attention, enjoy in Me a happiness that cannot be known by those lacking such
detachment from the material world.
COMMENTARY
The happiness which is derived by realizing the transcendental qualities of the Lord
while performing devotional service is being described here. Some experts say that jïänés
who  have  no  material  assets  can  also  attain  this  platform  of  transcendental  ecstasy.
That  is  why  the  Lord  has  made  this  statement,  just  to  distinguish  the  devotees  from
such jïänés. Pure devotees always desire to give Kåñëa conscious happiness to others, and
therefore they are called mahäntaù, or great souls. In the course of a devotee’s service,
many opportunities for sense gratification may arise, but a pure devotee is not tempted,
and so he does not fall down from his exalted transcendental position.
PURPORT
Sense enjoyers are always bewildered by unlimited desires for personal aggrandizement
and so they are unable to comprehend the sublime position of the pure devotees. The
devotees of the Lord are free from material desires and so they are peaceful. They don’t
strive for material acquisitions and they are the best well-wishers of people in general.
Because  the  devotees  are  merged  in  the  ocean  of  transcendental  happiness  derived
by  engagement  in  pure  devotional  service,  they  can  never  be  diverted  by  mundane
temptations.  Because  they  are  situated  on  the  platform  of  spiritual  bliss,  they  are
detached from the bodily conception of life and thus even a learned materialist cannot
understand his sublime position.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa Explains the Yoga System to ÇréUddhava
bädhyamäno ‘pi mad-bhakto viñayair ajitendriyaù
präyaù pragalbhayä bhaktyä viñayair näbhibhüyate
My  dear  Uddhava,  if  My  devotee  is  not  fully  able  to  control  his  senses,  he  may
sometimes be attracted to material enjoyment but because of his engagement in devotional
service, he will not be diverted by sense gratification.
COMMENTARY
The Lord said, “What to speak of those devotees who have attained the platform of
rati, even neophyte devotees are assured of success. A neophyte devotee may sometimes
be attracted to material enjoyment but because of the strength of his sincere devotional
service,  he  will  not  fall  down  from  his  exalted  position.”  If  a  jïäné  commits  sinful
activities,  he  immediately  falls  from  his  elevated  position.  A  devotee,  however,  even
though  immature,  never  falls  from  the  path  of  devotional  service.  Even  if  he  displays
occasional weakness, he is still considered a devotee if his devotion to Lord Kåñëa is very
strong.. This is confirmed by the Lord in the Bhagavad-gétä (9.30):
api cet su-duräcäro bhajate mäm ananya-bhäk
sädhur eva sa mantavyaù samyag vyavasito hi saù
Even if one commits the most abominable action, if he is engaged in devotional
service,  he  is  to  be  considered  saintly  because  he  is  properly  situated  in  his
determination.
In this regard, two examples can be given. Sometimes, a heroic warrior is struck by
the enemy’s powerful weapon, but while simply tolerating the pain, he goes on to achieve
victory. In the same way, one may be afflicted by a serious disease, but can be cured by
taking the prescribed medicine.
PURPORT
For  the  benefit  of  neophyte  devotees  who  cannot  fully  control  their  senses,  the
Supreme  Lord  said,  “Even  though  a  devotee  could  not  control  his  senses  and  thus
remains attached to sense gratification, if he wants to advance in devotional service to
Me and thus enthusiastically engages in sädhana-bhakti, so that he may gradually come
to the platform of bhäva-bhakti, then he will never meet with defeat.”
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
260 Chapter 8
yathägniù su-samåddhärciù karoty edhäàsi bhasmasät
tathä mad-viñayä bhaktir uddhavainäàsi kåtsnaçaù
O Uddhava, just as a blazing fire burns firewood to ashes, devotional service executed
for My pleasure completely destroys the sinful reactions of My devotees.
COMMENTARY
If a devotee fails to control his senses and accidentally engages in sinful activities,
the Lord will certainly burn to ashes all his sinful reactions, just as a blazing fire reduces
wood to a pile of ashes.
PURPORT
As long as we are intoxicated by material enjoyment, our propensity for serving the
Supreme Lord is like smoldering ashes. But, the moment our service attitude becomes
prominent, our material inclinations are destroyed, just as a blazing fire burns wood to
ashes. Lord Kåñëa is glorious, and one who takes exclusive shelter of the Lord receives
the unique benefits of devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
na sädhayati mäà yogo na säìkhyaà dharma uddhava
na svädhyäyas tapas tyägo yathä bhaktir mamorjitä
My dear Uddhava, neither through añöäì ga-yoga, nor through impersonal monism or
an analytical study of the Absolute Truth, nor through study of the Vedas, nor through
austerities, charity or acceptance of sannyäsa can one satisfy Me as much as by developing
unalloyed devotional service unto Me.
COMMENTARY
Devotional service is the only means by which one can satisfy the Supreme Lord.
One may make Kåñëa the goal of mystic yoga, Säìkhya philosophy, and so on, yet such
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa Explains the Yoga System to ÇréUddhava
activities do not please the Lord as much as direct loving service, which one practices
by hearing and chanting about the Lord and executing His mission. A devotee should
simply depend on Kåñëa and should not unnecessarily complicate his loving service with
tendencies toward fruitive work or mental speculation.
PURPORT
Many  people  think  that  they  can  achieve  great  benefit  by  studying  the  Vedas,
by  performing  austerities,  by  renouncing  material  enjoyment,  by  cultivating  Säìkhya
philosophy, and by study of Vedänta. However, all of these practices are not required for
engagement in the service of the Supreme Lord. Only unalloyed devotional service is
capable of satisfying the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
bhaktyäham ekayä grähyaù çraddhayätmä priyaù satäm
bhaktiù punäti man-niñöhä çva-päkän api sambhavät
Being very dear to the devotees and sädhus, I am attained through unflinching faith
and  devotional  service.  This  bhakti-yoga  system,  which  gradually  increases  attachment
for Me, purifies even a human being born among dog-eaters. That is to say, everyone can
be elevated to the spiritual platform by the process of bhakti-yoga.
COMMENTARY
So  that  no  one  will  have  any  doubt  about  the  best  process  for  attaining  the  goal
of  life,  the  Supreme  Lord  says,  “I  am  only  obtained  by  devotional  service,  and  not  by
any  other  processes,  such  as  yoga,  etc.”  Although  the  goal  of  Brahman,  attained  by
means  of  jïäna,  is  found  in  the  çästras,  it  is  to  be  understood  that  such  cultivation
of  knowledge  must  be  mixed  with  devotional  service.  Pious  activities,  such  as  the
cultivation  of  knowledge,  cannot  help  one  achieve  the  Supreme  Lord.  They  can  only
destroy one’s sinful reactions. Devotional service destroys sinful reactions in a way that
other  processes,  such  as  jïäna,  cannot.  In  this  regard,  Çrédhara  Svämé  has  concluded
that devotional service to the Supreme Lord automatically destroys the fault of taking
birth in a family of dog-eaters and completely purifies one.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
262 Chapter 8
PURPORT
The propensity for material enjoyment among those who are very fond of eating dogs
is so strong that they have very little faith in the service of the Supreme Lord. Devotees
of  the  Lord  are  not  interested  in  eating  abominable  food.  They  give  up  all  varieties
of  sense  gratification  and  attract  the  attention  of  the  Supreme  Lord  by  remaining
completely  dependent  upon  Him.  The  devotees  love  the  Supreme  Lord  as  their  most
dear  friend  and  as  such,  the  Lord  takes  pleasure  in  their  devotional  activities.  Simply
by developing the propensity for rendering devotional service to the Lord, the people of
this world who are now engaged in acts of sense gratification can become liberated from
their material conception of life.
dharmaù satya-dayopeto vidyä vä tapasänvitä
mad-bhaktyäpetam ätmänaà na samyak prapunäti hi
Truthfulness,  compassion,  religious  principles,  austerity,  and  knowledge  cannot
completely purify a person who is bereft of devotional service to Me.
COMMENTARY
Even though following religious principles and cultivating knowledge have the power
of destroying one’s sinful reactions, this is to be understood as true when such activities
are  combined  with  devotional  service  to  the  Lord.  Without  devotional  service,  these
activities have very little strength. The word vidyä in this verse refers to the cultivation
of knowledge.
PURPORT
Truthfulness,  trying  to  remove  others’  distress,  giving  in  charity,  performing
austerities, and practicing renunciation cannot thoroughly purify one’s existence. They
purify  one  to  some  extent  but  the  seed  of  material  desires  remains  so  that  after  some
time, one will again return to a life of sense gratification. However, because service to
the  Supreme  Lord  is  the  ultimate  religious  principle,  it  is  also  the  topmost  purifying
agent.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa Explains the Yoga System to ÇréUddhava
kathaà vinä roma-harñaà dravatä cetasä vinä
vinänandäçru-kalayä çudhyed bhaktyä vinäçayaù
Without  the  manifestation  of  ecstatic  symptoms  of  devotional  service,  such  as  the
hairs standing on end, how can the heart melt? If the heart does not melt,  how can tears
of love flow from the eyes? Without the melting of the heart, and without tears flowing
from the eyes, how can one render loving devotional service? Without devotional service,
how can the consciousness be purified?
COMMENTARY
Devotional  service,  which  produces  symptoms  of  ecstasy,  such  as  standing  of
the  hair  of  the  body  on  end,  is  the  only  means  to  completely  purify  the  heart.  Only
devotional service is capable of melting the heart and not any other sädhana. How can
the heart become purified without manifesting symptoms such as tears in the eyes, the
hairs standing on end, and so on? Çré Kåñëa Caitanya, who had incarnated to deliver
the people  of  Kali-yuga, said, “Even after studying the science of the Absolute Truth,
as described in the Upaniñads, if one does not hear the glories of Lord Hari, then the
transformations of love of God, indicating the melting of the heart, such as the shedding
of tears, will not manifest.” Even as one continues to engage in the activities of Kåñëa
consciousness,  if  his  heart  does  become  purified,  the  tinge  of  impurity  that  does  not
allow him to directly see the Lord will remain. This impurity is burnt to ashes only by
pure devotional service, and not by the small fire of the cultivation of knowledge.
PURPORT
One’s heart cannot be purified while one is constantly engaged in material enjoyment.
Our desires can be purified only by dovetailing them in the service of the Supreme Lord.
If we don’t engage ourselves in the Lord’s service, then the spirit of material enjoyment
will keep us forever bound to the fruits of our actions. When the heart melts, one sheds
tears of love and the hair of the body stands on end. Until that time, material enjoyment,
which is always mixed with frustration, will continue to misguide us.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
264 Chapter 8
väg gadgadä dravate yasya cittaà rudaty abhékñëaà hasati kvacic ca
vilajja udgäyati nåtyate ca mad-bhakti-yukto bhuvanaà punäti
A devotee who is fixed in loving service to Me, whose voice is sometimes choked up,
whose heart melts, who sometimes weeps and sometimes laughs, and sometimes chants
and dances without concern for others, purifies the three worlds.
COMMENTARY
One who has attained the platform of love of God can deliver the fallen conditioned
souls. This is not at all surprising. Sometimes his voice becomes choked up so that he
cannot speak coherently, and because his heart melts, he sometimes cries out in anxiety.
The word “sometimes” should be applied to each of the ecstatic symptoms, but the heart
remains melted in all situations.
PURPORT
Persons who are eternally engaged in the Lord’s service sometimes sing the Lord’s
holy  name  loudly  and  dance  in  ecstasy,  sometimes  display  the  softness  of  their  heart
by speaking in a voice that is choked up, sometimes laugh, and sometimes cry, without
caring for others. Only such devotees can purify the fourteen worlds.
yathägninä hema malaà jahäti dhmätaà punaù svaà bhajate ca rüpam
ätmä ca karmänuçayaà vidhüya mad-bhakti-yogena bhajaty atho mäm
Just  as  the  gold,  when  smelted  in  fire,  gives  up  its  impurities  and  returns  to  its
pure brilliant state, the spirit soul, absorbed in the fire of bhakti-yoga, is purified of all
contamination caused by previous fruitive activities and as a result, becomes situated in
his constitutional position as My eternal servant.
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Lord herein establishes the conclusion that only by devotional service
can the heart be purified, and not by any other process. The example is given of gold.
When gold is smelted in fire, all impurities are removed. This purification of gold cannot
be  obtained  simply  by  washing  it  with  soap  and  water.  Similarly,  a  living  entity  can
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa Explains the Yoga System to ÇréUddhava
cleanse  his  heart  of  all  contaminations  by  the  fire  of  devotional  service,  and  not  by
any superficial means. The result is that the devotee goes back home, back to Godhead,
and there worships Lord Kåñëa in his original spiritual body, which is compared to the
original pure form of smelted gold.
PURPORT
When  gold  is  smelted  in  fire,  all  of  the  impurities  of  base  metals  are  removed.
Similarly,  when  the  conditioned  souls,  whose  only  engagements  are  those  of  sense
gratification, put themselves in the fire of devotional service, then their aspirations for
material  enjoyment  are  reduced  to  nil  so  that  they  can  easily  traverse  the  path  back
home, back to Godhead.
yathä yathätmä parimåjyate ‘sau mat-puëya-gäthä-çravaëäbhidhänaiù
tathä tathä paçyati vastu sükñmaà cakñur yathaiväïjana-samprayuktam
If a diseased eye is smeared with medicinal ointment, it can gradually recover its lost
ability to see. Similarly, the more a living entity becomes purified by hearing and chanting
the  narrations  of  My  auspicious  glories,  the  more  he  can  perceive  My  transcendental
form.
COMMENTARY
The Vedas assure us that we can directly see the Supreme Lord and His transcendental
abode if we fully surrender unto Him and agree to obey His instructions. The Lord and
His name are non-different and as soon as one sincerely hears and chants the holy names
of the Lord, the wonderful effect will be felt.  The example can be given that a person
who has one eye is better off than one who is blind. A person who has both eyes is better
situated than a person who has only one eye, and a person whose eyes are smeared with
medicinal ointment may be able to see better than one who has not taken advantage of
such treatment. Similarly, according to the intensity of one’s determination to achieve
success in devotional service, he will be purified accordingly.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
266 Chapter 8
PURPORT
When one becomes too accustomed to a life of sense gratification, one loses sight
of the ultimate goal of life, which is to regain the association of the Supreme Lord. By
smearing  medicinal  ointment,  diseased  eyes  may  gradually  revive  their  power  to  see.
Similarly, by cultivating Kåñëa consciousness, one can attain the eternal service of the
Supreme Lord in transcendental love.
viñayän dhyäyataç cittaà  viñayeñu viñajjate
mäm anusmarataç cittaà mayy eva praviléyate
The mind of a person who meditates upon the objects of the senses becomes entangled
in such objects, but if one constantly remembers Me, then his mind becomes absorbed in
Me.
COMMENTARY
One should never think that the worship of the Lord is a mechanical process that
will automatically deliver the desired result. Such a mechanical approach to constantly
remembering  the  Lord  will  never  stand.  Constant  rememberance  of  the  Lord’s
transcendental  name,  form,  qualities,  and  pastimes  is  only  possible  for  one  who  has
developed  genuine  attachment  for  the  Lord.  Just  as  materialists  can  remain  absorbed
in  the  thought  of  the  objects  of  their  desire,  so  devotees  can  remain  in  absorbed  in
thoughts  of  the  Lord  when  they  have  developed  transcendental  attachment  to  His
devotional service.
PURPORT
As the material senses run after sense objects, thinking them to be most desirable,
by the cultivation of Kåñëa consciousness, one becomes fully absorbed in hearing and
chanting glorification of the Lord’s transcendental name, form, qualities, and pastimes.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa Explains the Yoga System to ÇréUddhava
tasmäd asad-abhidhyänaà yathä svapna-manoratham
hitvä mayi samädhatsva mano mad-bhäva-bhävitam
One  should  give  up  all  paths  for  material  elevation,  which  are  no  better  than  the
creations of a dream. One should rather absorb his mind in always thinking of Me, for
this will completely purify him of all material contamination.
COMMENTARY
Because other processes and their results are as illusory as things seen in a dream,
the  Lord  instructs  Uddhava  to  concentrate  his  mind  on  Him  by  engagement  in  pure
devotional service. One should give up all other methods for making advancement in
life and simply fix his mind in the thought of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
The  ultimate  goal  of  life  for  the  conditioned  souls  is  to  engage  in  the  unalloyed
devotional  service  of  the  Lord  by  surpassing  the  three  stages  of  consciousness—
wakefulness, dreaming, and deep sleep.
stréëäà stré-saìginäà saìgaà tyaktvä dürata ätmavän
kñeme vivikta äsénaç cintayen mäm atandritaù
One who is aware of his eternal self should give up the association of women and of
those who are attached to women and fearlessly sit down in a solitary place to carefully
meditate on Me.
COMMENTARY
One  should  particularly  give  up  studying  the  Käma-çästra  written  by  Vätsäyana
Muni. If a peaceful person associates with such literature, he will lose his patience and
become agitated. Therefore, one should fearlessly reside in a secluded place.
PURPORT
One  should  carefully  give  up  the  association  of  women,  as  well  as  those  who
are  attached  to  women,  and  should  fearlessly  and  enthusiastically  cultivate  Kåñëa
consciousness  in  a  secluded  place.  Simply  by  thinking  of  a  woman,  one  increases  the
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
268 Chapter 8
desire for material life, causing one to forget the Supreme Lord. Therefore, one should
completely disassociate himself from women and the desire to enjoy in their company.
This is possible only by surrendering oneself to the Supreme Lord.
na tathäsya bhavet kleço bandhaç cänya-prasaìgataù
yoñit-saìgäd yathä puàso yathä tat-saìgi-saìgataù
Of all kinds of distress and bondage, none is greater than the suffering and bondage
arising from intimate association with women, and those who attached to women.
COMMENTARY
One who desires to be delivered from material existence should renounce all intimate
contact  with  women,  as  well  as  those  who  are  attached  to  women.  Any  respectable
gentleman will become guarded if he comes in close contact with a lusty woman. The
difficulty is, however, that if one intimately associates with lusty men, their loose talk
will  infect  one  all  the  same.  Indeed,  the  association  of  lusty  men  can  be  even  more
dangerous than association with women, and thus  it should be avoided by all means.
PURPORT
There  are  innumerable  verses  in  the  Bhägavatam  describing  the  intoxication
of  material  lust.  Being  forgetful  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  the  conditioned  souls  consider
themselves  to  be  the  enjoyers  of  all  they  survey  and  thus  they  become  bound  by  the
three modes of material nature. This is the cause of their suffering. Because the living
entities  are  pleasure-seeking  by  nature,  in  conditional  life,  they  naturally  endeavor  to
reach the peak of material happiness by enjoying the association of women. Therefore,
devotees should carefully avoid the intimate association of women, as well as men who
are attached to women.
´Î3{H 3HÌ=
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa Explains the Yoga System to ÇréUddhava
çré-uddhava uväca
yathä tväm aravindäkña yädåçaà vä yad-ätmakam
dhyäyen mumukñur etan me dhyänaà tvaà vaktum arhasi
Çré Uddhava said: My dear lotus-eyed Çré Kåñëa, please describe to me how one who
desires liberation should meditate upon You. Upon which form should he meditate, and
what should be the nature of his meditation?
COMMENTARY
Çré  Uddhava  is  already  on  the  platform  of  pure  devotional  service.  Still,  he  is
inquiring about the process of meditation, not so much for his own benefit, but for the
benefit of those who are not situated in devotional service. Uddhava said: “O lotus-eyed
Lord,  kindly  tell  me  how  one  who  desires  liberation  should  meditate  on  You?  Upon
which form should he meditate?” One may argue: “What is the need for a pure devotee
like Uddhava to inquire about the process of meditation, which is to be performed by
those who desire liberation?” It should simply be understood that Uddhava asked such
a  question  not  for  his  personal  benefit,  but  for  those  who  have  not  yet  come  to  the
platform of pure love of God.
TEXTS 32-33
çré-bhagavän uväca
sama äsana äsénaù sama-käyo yathä-sukham
hastäv utsaìga ädhäya sva-näsägra-kåtekñaëaù
präëasya çodhayen märgaà püra-kumbhaka-recakaiù
viparyayeëäpi çanair abhyasen nirjitendriyaù
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: While seated on a level seat that is not
too high or too low, keeping the body straight and yet comfortable, placing the hands on
one’s lap, and focusing the eyes on the tip of the nose, one should purify the pathways of
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
270 Chapter 8
breathing by practicing the mechanical exercises of püraka, kumbhaka and recaka, and
then reverse the procedure. Having fully controlled the senses, one should thus practice
präëäyäma.
COMMENTARY
To concentrate the mind, one should fix his gaze on the tip of the nose. As stated
in the yoga-çästra, antar-lakñyo bahir-dåñöiù sthira-cittaù susaìgataù: “The eyes, which
generally see externally, must be turned inward, and thus the mind is steadied and fully
controlled.”
hådy avicchinam oàkäraà ghaëöä-nädaà bisorëa-vat
präëenodérya taträtha punaù saàveçayet svaram
One should raise the life air upwards to the heart, where the sacred syllable oà can
be heard like the sound of a bell. One should then continue raising this sacred syllable
upwards until it is joined with the anusvära vibration.
COMMENTARY
It  appears  that  the  yoga  system  is  somewhat  technical  and  difficult  to  perform.
Anusvära refers to a nasal vibration pronounced after the fifteen Sanskrit vowels. The
complete explanation of this process is extremely complicated and obviously unsuitable
for this age.
evaà praëava-saàyuktaà präëam eva samabhyaset
daça-kåtvas tri-ñavaëaà mäsäd arväg jitänilaù
The oàkära thus being joined, one should carefully practice the präëäyäma system
of yoga ten times at each sunrise, noon, and sunset. By doing so, after one month one will
have conquered the life air.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa Explains the Yoga System to ÇréUddhava
COMMENTARY
One  who  diligently  practices  yoga  as  recommended  herein  will  control  his  mind
after one month.
TEXTS 36-42
håt-puëòarékam antaù-stham ürdhva-nälam adho-mukham
dhyätvordhva-mukham unnidram añöa-patraà sa-karëikam
karëikäyäà nyaset sürya-somägnén uttarottaram
vahni-madhye smared rüpaàmamaitad dhyäna-maìgalam
samaà praçäntaà su-mukhaàdérgha-cäru-catur-bhujam
su-cäru-sundara-grévaàsu-kapolaà çuci-smitam
samäna-karëa-vinyasta-sphuran-makara-kuëòalam
hemämbaraà ghana-çyämaàçrévatsa-çré-niketanam
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
272 Chapter 8
çaìkha-cakra-gadä-padma-vanamälä-vibhüñitam
nüpurair vilasat-pädaàkaustubha-prabhayä yutam
dyumat-kiréöa-kaöaka-kaöi-süträìgadäyutam
sarväìga-sundaraà hådyaà prasäda-sumukhekñanam
su-kumäram abhidhyäyet sarväìgeñu mano dadhat
indriyäëéndriyärthebhyo manasäkåñya tan manaù
buddhyä särathinä dhéraù praëayena mayi sarvataù
Keeping the eyes half closed and fixed on the tip of the nose, and being wide awake
and alert, one should meditate on the lotus flower that is situated within the heart, which
has  eight  petals  and  an  erect  stalk.  One  should  meditate  on  the  sun,  moon,  and  fire,
placing them one after another within the whorl of the lotus flower. Then, placing My
transcendental form within the fire, one should meditate upon it as the auspicious goal of
all meditation. That transcendental form is perfectly proportioned, gentle, and cheerful,
and has four long arms, beautiful shoulders, a handsome forehead, a pure smile, and ears
that are decorated with shark-shaped earrings. That spiritual form has a complexion that
resembles that of a new rain cloud, and is dressed in golden-yellowish garments. The chest
of that form is the abode of Çrévatsa and Lakñmé, and is decorated with a conch shell, disc,
club, and lotus flower. That form of Mine is decorated with a garland of forest flowers.
The lotus feet are decorated with ankle bells, and this form exhibits the Kaustubha gem
and an effulgent crown. The upper hips are beautified by a golden belt, and the arms are
decorated  with  valuable  bracelets.  All  of  the  limbs  of  this  beautiful  form  captivate  the
heart, and the face is beautified by merciful glancing. Withdrawing the senses from their
sense objects, one should be grave and self-controlled and should use the intelligence to
fix his mind upon all of the limbs of My transcendental body. Thus one should meditate
upon that most delicate transcendental form of Mine.
COMMENTARY
The lotus flower in the heart stands on an erect stalk. The word nyaset indicates
that one should apply one’s concentration to meditate on the form of the Supreme Lord.
The  phrase  dhyäna  maìgala  means  “the  auspicious  object  of  meditation.”  The  word
sama  indicates  a  similar  form.  The  Lord  is  described  as  “peaceful,”  meaning  that  He
is  not  harsh.  The  two  marks  of  Çrévatsa  and  Lakñmé  are  situated  on  either  side  of  Çré
Kåñëa’s  chest.  For  concentrated  meditation,  one  should  fix  his  mind  with  the  help  of
his intelligence, and in this way, one should gradually perfect his meditation upon the
Supreme Lord.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa Explains the Yoga System to ÇréUddhava
tat sarva-vyäpakaà cittam äkåñyaikatra dhärayet
Nänyäni cintayed bhüyaù su-smitaà bhävayen mukham
Thereafter, one should withdraw the mind from the limbs of that transcendental form
and fix it on the wonderful smiling face of the Lord.
COMMENTARY
The  mind  may  be  satisfied  by  viewing  all  of  the  limbs  of  the  Lord’s  body  but  for
further advancement, one should withdraw and fix it on the Lord’s smiling face.
tatra labdha-padaà cittam äkåñya vyomni dhärayet
tac ca tyaktvä mad-äroho na kiïcid api cintayet
Thereafter, one should withdraw the mind, which had been firmly fixed on the lotus
face  of  the  Lord,  and  establish  it  in  the  sky,  which  is  the  cause  of  the  gross  cosmic
manifestation. Finally, one should relinquish that meditation as well and become fixed in
Me, thus giving up the process of meditation altogether.
COMMENTARY
Uddhava had inquired about the kind of meditation that would enable one to achieve
liberation  from  material  existence.  Here  it  is  indicated  that  by  meditating  upon  the
lotus-like face of the Lord, one easily attains supreme liberation. It should be understood
that  devotional  service  to  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  is  the  activity  of  the
liberated souls, and thus is fully transcendental. Simply to be a meditator is considered
very insignificant for those who are engaged in the unalloyed devotional service of the
Lord.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
274 Chapter 8
evaà samähita-matir mäm evätmänam ätmani
vicañöe mayi sarvätman jyotir jyotiñi saàyutam
One who has fixed his mind on Me should see Me within his own self, and should see
the individual soul within Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He should see how
he is situated within the Lord, just like rays of the sun are seen as united with the sun.
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Lord is situated within the hearts of all living entities, and the living
entities are situated within the gigantic universal body of the Lord. Still, the Supreme
Lord is the single maintainer of countless living entities.
dhyänenetthaà su-tévreëa yuïjato yogino manaù
saàyäsyaty äçu nirväëaà dravya jïäna-kriyä-bhramaù
When the yogécarefully controls his mind by complete absorption in meditation, his
false  identification  with  material  objects,  mundane  knowledge,  and  fruitive  activities  is
soon dispelled.
COMMENTARY
The  result  of  intense  meditation  upon  the  form  of  the  Lord  is  that  one  becomes
freed  from  all  illusion,  including  the  three-fold  miseries—ädhibhautika,  ädhidaivika,
and ädhyätmika.
PURPORT
Haöha-yoga,  or  karma-yoga,  and  vicära-yoga,  or  räja-yoga,  are  partial  aspects  of
bhakti-yoga.  The  non-devotee  yogés  engage  in  the  cultivation  of  knowledge,  but  it  is
only partial. The meditation which is performed in pure devotional service is absorption
in  thought  of  the  Supreme  Lord’s  transcendental  names,  forms,  qualities,  associates,
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa Explains the Yoga System to ÇréUddhava
and  pastimes.  Constant  meditation  is  the  result  of  absorption  in  the  glorification  of
the Lord, which is one of the nine processes of devotional service, known as kértana.
When  one  is  ignorant  of  his  spiritual  identity  as  the  eternal  servant  of  the  Supreme
Lord, he may be attracted to the performance of haöha-yoga. Such practice will enable
one to gradually come to realize his spiritual identity and so it may serve as a stepping
stone to the goal of devotional service. Those who take pleasure in mental speculation
to  philosophically  understand  the  Absolute  Truth  may,  after  many  births  and  deaths,
come to the conclusion that the Supreme Lord is the cause of all causes and thus begin
to  engage  in  devotional  service.  If  one  performs  meditation  without  accepting  the
transcendental  form  of  the  Lord  as  the  Absolute  Truth,  then  his  meditation  will  not
award  the  results  that  have  been  described  in  this  verse.  I.  In  the  haöha-yoga  system,
one learns to control the body and in the jïäna-yoga system, one learns to control the
mind. In either case, one works for his own elevation, being impelled by selfish desires.
This  kind  of  selfish  activity  is  referred  to  in  this  verse  as  kriyä.  One  who  desires  the
perfection  of  yoga  must  give  up  materialistic  dravya,  jïäna  and  kriyä  and  ultimately
engage in the devotional service of the Lord.
Thus ends the translation of the eighth chapter of the Uddhava-géta entitled “Lord
Kåñëa Explains the Yoga System to Çré Uddhava” with the commentaries of Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté  Öhäkura  and  chapter  summary  and  purports  by  Çréla  Bhaktisiddhänta
Sarasvaté Öhäkura.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 9
Lord Kåñëa’s desCrIPtIon of mystIC yoga PerfeCtIons
CHAPTER SUMMARY
This chapter describes the eight primary and ten secondary mystic perfections. These
mystic perfections are developed by fixing one’s mind in  yoga, but they are ultimately
detrimental to the achievement of Lord Viñëu’s lotus feet.
Being asked by Uddhava, Lord Çré Kåñëa describes the eighteen mystic perfections,
their characteristics, and what type of meditation is to be practiced for the attainment of
each one. The Lord concludes by saying, “For one who desires to render pure devotional
service  unto  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  the  attainment  of  these  mystic
powers  is  simply  a  waste  of  time  because  they  are  impediments  to  the  worship  of  the
Supreme Lord. All these mystic perfections are automatically offered to a pure devotee,
but  he  does  not  accept  them.  Unless  employed  in  the  devotional  service  of  the  Lord,
these mystic perfections have no value. A devotee simply sees that the Supreme Lord
is  present  everywhere,  both  externally  and  internally,  and  depends  completely  upon
Him.”
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
278 Chapter 9
çré-bhagavän uväca
jitendriyasya yuktasya jita-çväsasya yoginaù
mayi dhärayataç ceta upatiñöhanti siddhayaù
The Supreme Lord said: My dear Uddhava, when a yogé has controlled his senses,
conquered his breathing process, steadied his mind, and concentrated his mind on Me,
then all mystic perfections automatically appear to him.
COMMENTARY
There are eight primary mystic yoga perfections, beginning with aëimä-siddhi, and
ten secondary yoga perfections. In this chapter, Lord Kåñëa will explain that these yoga-
siddhis are stumbling blocks on the path of Kåñëa consciousness.
´Î3{H 3HÌ=
çré-uddhava uväca
kayä dhäraëayä kä svit kathaà vä siddhir acyuta
kati vä siddhayo brühi yoginäà siddhi-do bhavän
Çré  Uddhava  said:  My  dear  Lord  Acyuta,  You  alone  are  the  bestower  of  all  types
of  mystic  perfections.  Kindly  tell  me—by  what  process  can  the  mystic  perfections  be
achieved, how many types of mystic perfections are there, and what is the nature of each
mystic perfection?
COMMENTARY
The word svit is employed while inquiring.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of Mystic Yoga Perfections
çré-bhagavän uväca
siddhayo ‘ñöädaça proktä dhäraëä yoga-pära-gaiù
täsäm añöau mat-pradhänä daçaiva guëa-hetavaù
The Supreme Lord said: The sages, who are masters of yoga, have declared that there
are eighteen kinds of siddhi (mystic perfection) and dhäraëä (meditation). Among these,
eight  are  primary,  being  sheltered  in  Me,  and  ten  are  secondary,  appearing  from  the
material mode of goodness.
COMMENTARY
There are eighteen kinds of dhäraëä as well. The Supreme Lord is the shelter of the
eight primary dhäraëäs, because they have been manifested from His internal potency,
and are thus transcendental. The other ten meditations are mundane, being born from
the material mode of goodness.
PURPORT
Among the eighteen kinds of perfection, eight are transcendental and ten are within
the jurisdiction of the material modes of nature. The eight siddhis are aëimä, laghimä,
mahimä, präpti, präkämya, éçitä, vaçitä, and kämavasäyitä. Among them, the first three
pertain to the body, the fourth pertains to the senses, and the last four pertain to nature.
The ten minor perfections are anürminattva, düra-çravaëa, düradarçana, icchänurüpa
dehera  gati,  icchänurüpa  äkära  grahaëa,  parakäya  praveça,  svecchämåtyu,  deva  kåéòä
darçana, saìkalpita padärtha präpti, and apratihatä äjïä, and they are all mundane.
aëimä mahimä mürter laghimä präptir indriyaiù
präkämyaà çruta-dåñöeñu çakti-preraëam éçitä
guëeñv asaìgo vaçitä yat-kämas tad avasyati
etä me siddhayaù saumya añöäv autpattikä matäù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
280 Chapter 9
Aëimä,  becoming  smaller  than  the  smallest;  mahimä,  becoming  greater  than  the
greatest; and laghimä, becoming lighter than the lightest, are mystic perfections by which
one transforms one’s body. Präpti-siddhi, by which one acquires whatever one desires, is
related  to  the  senses.  Präkämya-siddhi  enables  one  to  experience  any  enjoyable  object,
in this world and in the next. Içitä-siddhi enables one to manipulate the sub-potencies
of  Maya.  Vaçita-siddhi  enables  one  to  be  unimpeded  by  the  three  modes  of  nature.
Kämävasäyitä-siddhi enables one to obtain anything he may desire. My dear Uddhava,
these eight siddhis are considered as naturally existing and unexcelled within this world.
COMMENTARY
Among  these  eight  mystic  perfections,  aëimä,  mahimä,  and  laghimä,  are  related
to  the  body.  Präpti-siddhi  is  related  to  the  senses,  because  by  utilizing  the  senses,  one
can acquire anything. Präkämya-siddhi awards one the power to enjoy objects that one
may have heard about but cannot see, such as something buried underground. By the
éçitä-siddhi, one can manipulate the sub-potencies of nature. By the vaçitä-siddhi, one
can  bring  others  under  one’s  control,  and  keep  oneself  beyond  the  influence  of  the
three modes of material nature. Kämävaçäyitä-siddhi gives one the maximum power of
control, acquisition, and enjoyment. These eight mystic perfections are certainly grand
accomplishments because they originally exist in the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
anürmimattvaà dehe ‘smin düra-çravaëa-darçanam
mano-javaù käma-rüpaà para-käya-praveçanam
svacchanda-måtyur devänäà saha-kréòänudarçanam
yathä-saìkalpa-saàsiddhir äjïäpratihatä gatiù
The  ten  secondary  mystic  siddhis  produced  from  the  mode  of  material  nature  are
the  power  to  free  oneself  from  hunger  and  thirst,  to  hear  and  see  things  happening  in
a  distant  place,  to  move  one’s  body  at  the  speed  of  the  mind,  to  assume  any  form  one
desires, to enter the bodies of others, to die according to one’s will, to witness the pastimes
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of Mystic Yoga Perfections
of the demigods with the Apsaräs, to act however one desires, and to give orders whose
fulfillment is unimpeded.
COMMENTARY
The ten secondary mystic perfections are herein described. These powers award one
freedom from the six urges of the body, such as hunger and thirst; seeing and hearing
what is happening at a distant place; moving the body at the speed of the mind; assuming
the form of one’s choice; witnessing the pleasure pastimes of the demigods and celestial
women;  attaining  whatever  one  desires;  and  the  carrying  out  of  one’s  orders  without
impediment.
tri-käla-jïatvam advandvaà para-cittädy-abhijïatä
agny-arkämbu-viñädénäà pratiñöambho ‘paräjayaù
etäç coddeçataù proktä yoga-dhäraëa-siddhayaù
yayä dhäraëayä yä syäd yathä vä syän nibodha me
The power to know past, present, and future; tolerance of dualities, such as heat and
cold; to know others’ minds; checking the influence of fire, sun, water, poison and so on;
and  to  remain  undefeated  by  others—these  constitute  five  perfections  attained  by  the
practice of yoga and meditation. I have simply listed them here, giving their names and
characteristics. Now, please hear from Me about how one attains a particular siddhi by
performing a specific meditation.
COMMENTARY
The  following  are  considered  to  be  insignificant  siddhis—knowing  past,  present
and  future;  not  becoming  overwhelmed  by  the  dualities,  such  as  heat  and  cold;  and
checking the influence of fire, sun, poison, and so on.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
282 Chapter 9
PURPORT
Knowledge  of  past,  present,  and  future;  being  undisturbed  by  heat  and  cold;
understanding the intentions of others; neutralization of the powers of fire, the sun, water,
poison, and so on; and to be unconquerable—these are five insignificant perfections.
bhüta-sükñmätmani mayi tan-mätraà dhärayen manaù
aëimänam aväpnoti tan-mätropäsako mama
One who fixes his mind on Me in My atomic form, which pervades all subtle elements,
worshiping that form alone, attains the mystic perfection known as aëimä siddhi.
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Lord possesses a tiny form whereby He resides within the atoms and
atomic particles. One who can concentrate his mind on the Supersoul can obtain the
mystic power called aëimä, which enables one to enter within any material object.
PURPORT
The  Supreme  Lord  has  covered  the  godless  living  entities  with  gross  and  subtle
material designations made of the illusory energy. If one desires to free his mind from
the gross material designations, then he must meditate on the subtle form of the Lord.
Those who worship the Lord as He is situated within the subtle forms of sense objects
can achieve the aëimä-siddhi.
mahat-tattvätmani mayi yathä-saàsthaà mano dadhat
mahimänam aväpnoti bhütänäà ca påthak påthak
One who concentrates his mind on the Lord as He is situated in the mahat-tattva
as  the  Supersoul  of  the  total  material  elements  can  obtain  the  mystic  perfection  called
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of Mystic Yoga Perfections
mahimä. By absorbing the mind in the existence of each material element, one can obtain
their potencies.
COMMENTARY
The  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  is  in  one  sense  non-different  from  the
material creation. Considering this, one can meditate upon the mahat-tattva as a subtle
manifestation  of the Lord’s inferior potency. When one has actually realized that the
universe  is  non-different  from  the  Lord,  he  obtains  the  mystic  perfection  known  as
mahimä-siddhi. When one can realize the Lord’s presence within each of the material
elements, he obtains their potency.
PURPORT
One who meditates upon the Lord as the Supreme Soul of the total material existence,
or  mahat-tattva,  can  attain  the  mystic  perfection  called  mahimä-siddhi.  By  realizing
how the mahat-tattva is not different from the Supreme Lord, being the expansion of
His energy, one can experience His presence within each of the element—earth, water,
fire, air, and space. This awards one the siddhi of mahimä.
paramäëu-maye cittaà bhütänäà mayi raïjayan
käla-sükñmärthatäà yogé laghimänam aväpnuyät
By fixing the mind on Me as I am situated within everything, and thus the essence of
the atomic constituents of the material elements, a yogi can attain the mystic perfection
called laghimä, which enables him to become as light as an atom.
COMMENTARY
Käla, or time, is the form of the Lord that moves the material world. The five gross
elements are composed of atoms, and atomic particles are a subtle manifestation of the
movements of time. The Personality of Godhead is more subtle than time and it is He
who expands to become the time factor. By understanding this, one obtains the mystic
power known as laghimä-siddhi, whereby he can become lighter than the lightest.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
284 Chapter 9
PURPORT
If the yogi fixes his mind in meditation on the subtle characteristics of the material
elements, understanding them to be energetic expansions of the Supreme Lord, he can
attain  the  laghimä  siddhi.  Those  who  are  not  devoted  to  the  Supreme  Lord  will  only
achieve an illusory fragment of this mystic potency, however.
dhärayan mayy ahaà-tattve mano vaikärike ‘khilam
sarvendriyäëäm ätmatvaà präptià präpnoti man-manäù
One who meditates on Me as situated within the element of false ego as generated
from the mode of goodness attains the siddhi called präpti, by which one gains mastery
over everyone’s senses.
COMMENTARY
The yogi who fixes his mind on the Lord as He is situated within the false ego can
attain the power whereby he can acquire any object he desires.
PURPORT
By reviving one’s relationship with the Absolute Personality of Godhead, all of one’s
senses become engaged in the service of the master of the senses. This is the essence of
understanding the mystic perfection called präpti. Those who try to attain mystic powers
without meditating on the Supreme Lord are awarded a mere reflection of these siddhis.
Because they are not in union with the Lord through devotion, they cannot partake of
His mystic potencies, which are of cosmic proportions, and thus must be satisfied with
mere reflections of those powers.
mahaty ätmani yaù sütre dhärayen mayi mänasam
präkämyaà pärameñöhyaà me vindate ‘vyakta-janmanaù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of Mystic Yoga Perfections
One who concentrates his mind on Me as the Supersoul of that aspect of the mahat-
tattva  that  manifests  the  wheel  of  karma  obtains  from  Me,  who  is  beyond  material
perception, the mystic perfection called präkämya.
COMMENTARY
The  aspect  of  the  mahat-tattva  that  produces  the  cycle  of  action  and  reaction  is
herein referred to as sütra. By fixed meditation on the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who  is  the  soul  of  the  mahat-tattva,  one  can  achieve  the  most  excellent  perfection
called präkämya. This opulence is especially employed by Brahmä. Avyakta-janmanaù
indicates  that  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  appears  from  the  avyakta,  or  the
spiritual sky, or that His birth is avyakta, beyond the perception of material senses.
PURPORT
Those  who  mistakenly  consider  the  mahat-tattva  to  be  more  important  than
Hiraëyagarbha  claim  to  have  achieved  the  mystic  perfection  called  präkämya.  Those
who have actually attained präkämya siddhi accept Hiraëyagarbha as the worshipable
Lord of the mahat-tattva, lying on the ocean of milk.
viñëau try-adhéçvare cittaà dhärayet käla-vigrahe
sa éçitvam aväpnoti kñetrajïa-kñetra-codanäm
One  who  meditates  on  My  form  as  Lord  Viñëu,  the  Supersoul,  the  personification
of  time  and  the  controller  of  the  three  modes  of  material  nature,  attains  the  siddhi
called  éçitva,  by  which  he  can  control  the  material  bodies  of  others,  along  with  their
designations.
COMMENTARY
The  illusory  energy  of  the  Lord,  which  consists  of  the  three  modes  of  material
nature, is under the control of time. By meditating on this form of the Supreme Lord,
one can obtain the éçitva siddhi. This siddhi enables one to exert his influence over the
bodies of other conditioned souls.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
286 Chapter 9
PURPORT
The  Supreme  Lord’s  illusory  potency  consists  of  three  modes  of  material  nature
and it works fully under the supervision of time, which has also emanated from Him.
The  Supersoul  of  the  manifested  material  elements  is  an  expansion  of  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead.  Liberated  souls  absorbed  in  meditation  upon  the  Supersoul
attain the éçitva siddhi without separate endeavor. Those who consider the form of the
Lord to be a manifestation of the three modes of material nature, and thus a product of
matter under the control of eternal time, and consider themselves to be one in identity
with the Supersoul, are understood to be bereft of all knowledge. Because of this, they
cannot discriminate between the mäyädhéça Lord and the mäyävaça jéva. The hopes of
such persons to master the éçitva siddhi  is simply another manifestation of illusion.
näräyaëe turéyäkhye bhagavac-chabda-çabdite
mano mayy ädadhad yogé mad-dharmä vaçitäm iyät
A yogi who meditates on My form of Näräyaëa, who is full of six opulences and who
is fully transcendental, becomes endowed with My nature and thus achieves the vaçitä
siddhi.
COMMENTARY
Here, the word turéya, or the fourth dimension, refers to the Personality of Godhead,
who is beyond the influence of the three modes of material nature. He is known as Lord
Näräyaëa  and  possesses  all  six  opulences  in  full.  By  fixing  one’s  mind  on  Him,  one
can attain the mystic perfection called vaçitä. The Lord is known as Bhagavän, or the
possessor of unlimited opulences, principally wealth, strength, fame, beauty, knowledge,
and renunciation.
PURPORT
When a yogi realizes that all the objects of this world have a relationship of service
with the Supreme Lord, he surpasses materialistic conceptions, such as length, breadth,
height,  and  so  on,  and  becomes  situated  in  transcendence.  This  is  the  platform  of
knowledge of one’s eternal relationship with the Supreme Lord. While situated on the
transcendental  platform,  such  a  yogi  controls  his  senses,  mind,  and  speech,  and  thus
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of Mystic Yoga Perfections
attains the siddhi known as vaçitä. Those who are servants of their bodily urges and thus
come under the control of sense objects, even though they may advertise themselves as
liberated souls, can never attain the vaçitä siddhi.
nirguëe brahmaëi mayi dhärayan viçadaà manaù
paramänandam äpnoti yatra kämo ‘vaséyate
One who meditated upon the impersonal Brahman, which is a partial manifestation of
the Absolute Truth, will attain happiness beyond material conception and all his desires
will be fulfilled.
COMMENTARY
Merging  into  the  existence  of  Brahman  is  possible  only  when  all  material  desires
have ceased.
PURPORT
When a conditioned living entity comes in contact with the three modes of material
nature, he exhibits various kinds of material desires. When the conditioned soul engages
in the devotional service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the reservoir
of all transcendental qualities, and who is situated beyond the modes of material nature,
then all his material desires are vanquished, just as fog is dispelled as soon as the sun
rises. The kämävasäyitä siddhi is obtained when one dovetails all of his desires in the
service of the eternal Kämadeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
çvetadvépa-patau cittaà çuddhe dharma-maye mayi
dhärayaï chvetatäà yäti ñaò-ürmi-rahito naraù
One  who  fixes  his  mind  on  My  form  as  the  predominating  Deity  of  the  mode  of
goodness,  the  upholder  of  religious  principles,  and  the  Lord  of  Çvetadvépa,  attains  a
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
288 Chapter 9
purified form and freedom from the six waves of material disturbance—hunger, thirst,
decay, death, grief, and illusion.
COMMENTARY
In  this  verse,  Lord  Kåñëa  begins  His  description  of  how  one  can  attain  the  ten
secondary mystic perfections.
PURPORT
By engaging in the devotional service of the Supreme Lord, who is transcendental
to  the  material  modes  of  nature,  who  is  the  form  of  the  pure  religious  principles,  and
who is the Lord of Çvetadvépa, all of the contamination in one’s heart becomes cleansed.
The Absolute Truth is the embodiment of pure goodness and He is the predominating
Deity  of  the  mode  of  goodness.  By  directing  one’s  heart  toward  the  service  of  the
Lord, one becomes purified, so that the black spot of “I am God” can no longer cause
contamination.
mayy äkäçätmani präëe manasä ghoñam udvahan
tatropalabdhä bhütänäà haàso väcaù çåëoty asau
If  a  purified  transcendentalist  mediates  on  the  extraordinary  sound  vibrations
occurring within Me as the personified sky and total life air, then he is able to perceive
within the sky the speaking of all living entities.
COMMENTARY
By meditating on the transcendental sound vibration, oàkara, one can achieve the
mystic perfection of being able to hear the words of the living entities that are spread
in the sky.
PURPORT
In the ekäyana worship of the paramahaàsas, chanting the holy name of the Lord is
considered to be the most important activity. It is the duty of all living entities to receive
the transcendental sound vibration of the Absolute Truth. When all words are aimed
at glorifying the Supreme Lord, one becomes able to hear the speech originating from
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of Mystic Yoga Perfections
liberated living entities far beyond the material universe. Liberated souls can visualize
reality simply by the reception of the transcendental sound vibration.
cakñus tvañöari saàyojya tvañöäram api cakñuñi
mäà tatra manasä dhyäyan viçvaà paçyati dürataù
While engaging in meditation on Me as existing within the combined form of the sun
and vision, if one can merge one’s sight into the sun, and then the sun into one’s eyes, one
can acquire the power to see any distant thing.
COMMENTARY
There is an intimate relationship between the sun and the process of vision. The
two are inseparable and are pervaded by the presence of the Supreme Lord in His all-
pervading feature as the Supersoul. Here, the process for attaining the mystic perfection
that enables one to see objects even though very distant is being described.
PURPORT
While casting one’s glance upon Lord Näräyäëa as He is situated within the sun globe,
if, in reciprocation, one receives the auspicious glance of the Lord, one will see through
purified vision that the objects of this world are meant for the Lord’s enjoyment, and not
for one’s personal sense gratification. Without receiving the Lord’s glance, one will see
the world as either meant for one’s enjoyment, or as the object of dry renunciation.
mano mayi su-saàyojya dehaà tad-anuväyunä
mad-dhäraëänubhävena taträtmä yatra vai manaù
When one completely absorbs his mind in Me by meditation and then utilizes the air
that carries the mind can attain the mystic power that allows him to travel in a moment
to anywhere he desires.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
290 Chapter 9
COMMENTARY
This verse states that there is an air that adheres to the mind. When one absorbs
this air, along with the mind, in meditation upon the Supreme Lord, his gross material
body will be enabled to travel at the speed of mind to any destination he desires
PURPORT
When  the  yogi  comes  to  see  everything  in  relationship  to  Kåñëa,  then  his  mind
will  entertain  no  other  thought  than  his  engagement  in    devotional  service.  In  that
transcendental state, one loses all interest in attempts to enjoy gross material objects.
This is the prerequisite for attaining genuine mystic perfections.
yadä mana upädäya yad yad rüpaà bubhüñati
tat tad bhaven mano-rüpaà mad-yoga-balam äçrayaù
When a yogi desires to assume a particular form by applying his mind in that way,
that form will appear before him. Such a mystic perfection is possible by meditating upon
the inconceivable mystic potency by which I assume various transcendental forms.
COMMENTARY
If the mind desires to assume the form of a demigod, it can do so by transforming
itself as the ingredient cause. If the yogi concentrates his mind on the Supreme Lord as
prescribed in this verse, he can assume any form he desires.
PURPORT
Çré Gaurasundara has said:
anyera hådaya—mana,     mora mana—våndävana,
‘mane’ ‘vane’ eka kari’ jäni
tähäì tomära pada-dvaya,     karäha yadi udaya,
tabe tomära pürëa kåpä mäni
For most people, the mind and heart are one, but because My mind is never
separated  from  Våndävana,  I  consider  My  mind  and  Våndävana  to  be  one.  My
mind is already Våndävana, and since You like Våndävana, will You please place
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of Mystic Yoga Perfections
Your lotus feet there? I would deem that Your full mercy. (Caitanya-caritämåta
Madhya 13.137)
This mystic power is called käma-rüpa, or the ability to assume any form one desires.
The pure devotees absorb their minds in a particular relationship with Lord Kåñëa and
thus a spiritual body is awarded to them for an eternal life in the Lord’s association. In
this  age,  anyone  who  faithfully  chants  the  holy  names  of  Lord  Kåñëa  and  follows  the
regulative principles as instructed by the spiritual master can attain an eternal form in
the supreme abode of the Lord.
para-käyaà viçan siddha ätmänaà tatra bhävayet
piëòaà hitvä viçet präëo väyu-bhütaù ñaòaìghri-vat
A  yogi  who  desires  to  enter  another  body  should  meditate  upon  himself  as  being
situated in that body. As a bumblebee easily goes from one flower to another, a yogi, with
the help of his subtle body, can enter another body through the path of the air.
COMMENTARY
To enter into the body of another person, a yogi must relinquish his gross body and
with the help of his subtle body, enter that body through the pathways of external air. It
is something like a bumble bee, which travels from one flower to another. The siddhi of
entering another body is called para-käya-praveçanam.
PURPORT
One  may  admire  a  heroic  man  or  beautiful  woman  and  desire  to  experience  life
within their extraordinary material body. One can enter the body of another person by
availing himself of the mystic perfection called para-käya-praveçanam. However, pure
devotees  are  never  attracted  to  any  kind  of  material  body,  knowing  that  even  in  the
topmost  planet  there  is  material  misery  and  death.  Instead,  they  remain  satisfied  on
the platform of eternal life. The spiritual air transfers a devotee to Goloka Våndävana,
where he eternally engages in the Lord’s service as a member of His entourage.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
292 Chapter 9
pärñëyäpéòya gudaà präëaà håd-uraù-kaëöha-mürdhasu
äropya brahma-randhreëa brahma nétvotsåjet tanum
To  achieve  the  mystic  perfection  called  svacchanda-måtyu,  a  yogi  should  block  his
anus  with  the  heel  of  his  foot  and  then  gradually  lift  the  soul,  along  with  the  life  air,
from the heart to the chest, then to the neck, and finally to the head. Situated within the
brahma-randhra, the yogi then gives up his material body and guides the spirit soul to
his desired destination.
COMMENTARY
One who has attained the mystic perfection of çvecchä måtyu, the ability to die at
will, can guide his soul, along with the life air, to either the impersonal Brahman or to
any destination within the material world, through the brahma-randhra, by giving up
his material body while blocking the anus with the heel of the foot.
PURPORT
Since  the  practice  of  giving  up  the  body  as  described  in  this  verse,  by  means  of
perfection  in  the  practice  of  haöha  yoga,  or  räja  yoga,  cannot  enable  one  to  surpass
the  kingdom  of  mundane  existence,  it  is  sensible  to  accept  everything  favorable  for
the  practice  of  Kåñëa  consciousness.  If  one  cultivates  Kåñëa  consciousness  within  his
heart  while  giving  up  all  thoughts  of  sense  gratification,  thus  detaching  himself  from
the desire for material enjoyment, and giving up the propensity for either enjoying or
renouncing the fruits of his karma while engaging in the service of the Supreme Lord,
he will automatically  attain this mystic perfection.
vihariñyan suräkréòe mat-sthaà sattvaà vibhävayet
vimänenopatiñöhanti sattva-våttéù sura-striyaù
One who desires to enjoy life in the celestial gardens of the demigods should meditate
upon  the  mode  of  purified  goodness,  which  is  situated  within  Me.    When  he  becomes
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of Mystic Yoga Perfections
fixed in this meditation, heavenly damsels that are generated from the mode of goodness
will approach him, riding in their celestial chariots.
COMMENTARY
One of the mystic perfections available to the yogi enables him to enjoy with the
celestial damsels in heaven.
PURPORT
In  order  to  remain  aloof  from  the  propensity  of  imitating  the  spirit  of  sense
enjoyment after seeing sensual activities in a movie or among the lower animals, one’s
heart must become captivated by the Supreme Lord’s räsa-lélä pastimes. Even the spirit
of enjoyment that celestial women can arouse in the heart of a yogi can be transformed
in  this  way.  Anugrahäya  bhaktänäà  mänuñaà  deham  ästhitaù  bhajate  tädåçéù  kréòa
yäù  çrutvä  tat-paro  bhavet  (Çrémad-Bhägavatam  10.33.36):  When  the  Lord  assumes  a
humanlike  body  to  show  mercy  to  His  devotees,  He  engages  in  such  pastimes  as  will
attract those who hear about them to become dedicated to Him.
This  transformation  is  only  possible  when  one  has  come  to  an  advanced  stage  of
yogic perfection. In that advanced stage, there is no question of imitating the Lord for
one’s personal sense gratification. Rather, the perfected yogi’s only desire is to serve the
Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa. This is an example of an eternal siddhi.
yathä saìkalpayed buddhyä yadä vä mat-paraù pumän
mayi satye mano yuïjaàs tathä tat samupäçnute
One who has implicit faith in Me and thus concentrates his mind upon Me, knowing
that  My  determination  is  never  frustrated,  will  have  his  desires  fulfilled  by  the  very
means he has adopted.
COMMENTARY
If one resolves with determination to attain some particular object, then he should
meditate upon the Supreme Lord, whose determination is never foiled. This will enable
one to achieve his desired goal. This mystic perfection is called saìkalpa siddhi.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
294 Chapter 9
PURPORT
One should make up his mind to revive his forgotten relationship with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead by means of devotional service, which can be executed anywhere
by anyone. There are many scriptures that guide one back to home, back to Godhead.
Among  them  are  Saìkalpa  kalpa-druma  by  Çréla  Jéva  Gosvämé,  Çré  Govinda-lélämåta
by  Çréla  Kåñëadäsa  Kaviräja  Gosvämé,  Çré  Kåñëa-bhävanämåta  and  Saìkalpa  kalpa-
druma  by  Çréla  Viçvanätha  Cakravarté,  and  Çré  Gauräìga-smaraëa-maëgala  by  Çréla
Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura. By carefully studying the subjects presented in books like Bhakti-
rasämåta-sindhu and Ujjvala-nélamaëi, one’s eternal perfection can be awakened, saving
one from the attractions of this illusory material existence, which only end in misery.
yo vai mad-bhävam äpanna éçitur vaçituù pumän
kutaçcin na vihanyeta tasya cäjïä yathä mama
One  who  perfects  his  meditatioin  upon  Me  can  imbibe  My  controlling  power.  His
order, just like Mine, can never be thwarted at any time.
COMMENTARY
If a yogi  perfects his meditation upon the Supersoul, he can receive from the Lord
the mystic power of being able to control others so well that, like the Lord, his order can
never prove futile.
PURPORT
The  material  nature  is  working  under  the  direction  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  Pure
devotees  are  never  diverted  from  the  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  being  tempted  by
the temporary objects of sense gratification. The orders of such devotees can never be
frustrated, just as the orders of the Supreme Lord are never counteracted.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of Mystic Yoga Perfections
mad-bhaktyä çuddha-sattvasya yogino dhäraëä-vidaù
tasya trai-käliké buddhir janma-måtyüpabåàhitä
One who has become purified as a result of rendering devotional service to Me, and
thus has carefully controlled his mind by the practice of meditation, becomes cognizant
of past, present, and future. With this understanding, he can witness the appearance and
disappearance of all living beings.
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Lord knows past, present and future and so a yogi who meditates on
the Lord can receive that mystic opulence from the Lord. This is the perfection known
as trikälajïatä siddhi, which also enables one to know about the birth and death of all
people.
PURPORT
The impersonalists imagine that they have become one with the Lord but it is the
devotees who actually share the Lord’s transcendental qualities. Being fully devoted to
the Lord, the pure devotees are situated on the same platform as the Lord, a platform
that is above the influence of time in terms of past, present, and future. Thus, the pure
devotees who are liberated due to being absorbed in the service of the Lord are knowers
of past, present, and future, as is the Lord.
agny-ädibhir na hanyeta muner yoga-mayaà vapuù
mad-yoga-çänta-cittasya yädasäm udakaà yathä
Just as the body of an aquatic cannot be injured by water, the body of a peaceful and
devoted sage whose spiritual realization has matured by the practice of yoga, cannot be
injured by fire, the sun, water, poison, and so forth.
COMMENTARY
By meditating on the Supreme Lord in pure devotional service, the heart of a peaceful
sage becomes saturated with transcendental experience. In that stage of perfection, one
attains the siddhi by which his body cannot be injured by the material elements in the
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
296 Chapter 9
form  of  fire,  the  sun,  water,  poison,  and  so  forth.  The  example  of  an  aquatic  is  given
here. Water cannot harm the body of aquatics—rather they enjoy life in their natural
element.  Similarly,  the  perfect  yogi  can  easily  fend  off  all  attacks  from  the  material
elements.
PURPORT
Although the material elements cause transformations of gross objects and can effect
the  nature  of  subtle  existence,  the  spiritually  blissful  body  of  the  Lord’s  devotees  are
never affected by material conditions. Devotees are never tempted to enjoy the objects
of this world in a way that is not related to the service of the Supreme Lord. Materialists
condemn  their  misfortune  when  they  cannot  make  material  advancement,  whereas
devotees  of  the  Lord  remain  joyfully  engaged  in  the  devotional  service  of  the  Lord,
having given up all desires for material advancement. The example is given that aquatics
enjoy living in the water, whereas terrestrials in the bodily concept of life would bring
about their destruction if they tried to live in the same way. Like the aquatics in water,
as  long  as  the  Lord’s  devotees  remain  situated  in  their  natural  element  of  devotional
service,  they  will  not  become  overwhelmed  by  the  currents  of  material  thoughts,  like
the conditioned souls.
mad-vibhütér abhidhyäyan çrévatsästra-vibhüñitäù
Dhvajätapatra-vyajanaiù sa bhaved aparäjitaù
A devotee who constantly meditates on My incarnations, which are decorated with
the  mark  of  Çrévatsa  and  hold  various  weapons  in  Their  hands,  and  which  are  always
appear with royal grandeur, cannot be conquered by anyone.
COMMENTARY
By meditating on the various incarnations of the Lord, one becomes unconquerable
in all respects. This mystic perfection is called aparäjaya siddhi.
PURPORT
The  Lord’s  flag,  umbrella,  cämara,  Kaustubha  gem,  and  weapons  indicate  His
omnipotency.  Those  who  meditate  on  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  in  this
feature attain the mystic perfection known as aparäjita.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of Mystic Yoga Perfections
All of the mystic perfections obediently come to serve the devotee of the Lord. This
is confirmed by Bilvamaëgala Öhäkura in his book, Kåñëa-karëämåta (107):
bhaktis tvayi sthiratarä bhagavan yadi syäd
daivena naù phalati divya-kiçora-mürtiù
muktiù svayaà mukulitäïjali sevate ’smän
dharmärtha-käma-gatayaù samaya-pratékñäù
If  I  am  engaged  in  devotional  service  unto  You,  my  dear  Lord,  then  very
easily  can  I  perceive  Your  presence  everywhere.  And  as  far  as  liberation  is
concerned, I think that liberation stands at my door with folded hands, waiting to
serve me—and all material conveniences of dharma (religiosity), artha (economic
development), and käma (sense gratification) stand with her.
upäsakasya mäm evaà yoga-dhäraëayä muneù
siddhayaù pürva-kathitä upatiñöhanty açeñataù
A learned sage who worships Me through yoga meditation certainly attains the siddhis
that have been described by Me.
COMMENTARY
Here,  the  Lord  concludes  His  explanation  of  the  mystic  powers  obtained  by  the
practice  of  yoga.The  word  yoga-dhäraëayä  indicates  that  one  obtains  the  particular
yoga-siddha he endeavored for.
jitendriyasya däntasya jita-çväsätmano muneù
mad-dhäraëäà dhärayataù kä sä siddhiù su-durlabhä
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
298 Chapter 9
For  one  who  has  learned  to  control  his  senses,  breathing,  and  mind,  by  being
constantly engaged in meditation on Me, what mystic power would be very difficult for
him to obtain?
COMMENTARY
The Lord herein says that anyone who can control his breathing and fix his mind
on Him can achieve any mystic perfection he desires.
antaräyän vadanty etä yuïjato yogam uttamam
mayä sampadyamänasya käla-kñapaëa-hetavaù
It  has been stated by learned experts in devotional service that for he who desires
to  achieve  the  wealth  of  My  association  by  means  of  his  execution  of  pure  devotional
service, the mystic perfections that I have described are actually impediments and a waste
of time.
COMMENTARY
These  mystic  perfections  can  attract  and  excite  only  small  boys  and  not  mature
men.  These  siddhis  are  actually  impediments  on  the  path  of  attaining  shelter  at  the
lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.  One who has the association of Lord
Kåñëa dwells within an unlimited ocean of mystic opulence and so he should not waste
his precious time pursuing mystic perfections independently of the Lord’s service.
PURPORT
Inferior yogas like haöha-yoga or räja-yoga certainly waste the practitioner’s valuable
time.  The  devotees  of  the  Lord  consider  such  yoga  practice  to  be  a  hindrance  on  the
path of pure devotional service. In this regard, one should study the verse of the Çrémad-
Bhägavatam that begins with yamädibhir yogapathiù.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of Mystic Yoga Perfections
janmauñadhi-tapo-mantrair yävatér iha siddhayaù
yogenäpnoti täù sarvä nänyair yoga-gatià vrajet
Whatever mystic perfections can be achieved as a result of good birth, herbs, austerities,
and mantras can be achieved by engagement in My devotional service. In fact, one cannot
attain the actual perfection of yoga by any other means.
COMMENTARY
Some siddhis are naturally acquired from the time of one’s birth. By taking birth as
a demigod, one is automatically endowed with many mystic perfections. Simply by being
born on Siddhaloka, one automatically acquires all of the eight principal perfections of
yoga. Similarly, by being born as a fish one becomes invulnerable to water, by being born
as a bird one gets the mystic perfection of flying, and by becoming a ghost one gets the
mystic perfection of disappearing and entering the bodies of others. It is stated in the
Pätaìjala çästra that mystic perfections can be achieved by good birth, medicinal herbs,
austerities, mantras, and yoga.
PURPORT
Those who reject the devotional service of the Lord and endeavor for perfection by
some other means cannot be considered very intelligent. The devotees reject all other
processes to engage in the unalloyed devotional service of the Lord. So-called yogis who
are interested in their personal sense enjoyment cannot understand the importance of
pleasing the senses of Lord Kåñëa. Any process other than the service of the Supreme
Lord, which is the ultimate goal of yoga, will certainly award one only frustration.
sarväsäm api siddhénäà hetuù patir ahaà prabhuù
ahaà yogasya säìkhyasya dharmasya brahma-vädinäm
O Uddhava, I alone am the cause, maintainer, and Lord of all mystic perfections, all
yoga processes, Säìkhya philosophy, devotional service, and brahmavädés.
COMMENTARY
All mystic perfections are accomplished simply by meditating on the Supreme Lord.
Therefore, He is the cause of all kinds of mystic perfections. He is also the maintainer
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
300 Chapter 9
of  the  mystic  perfections,  and  the  Lord  of  those  perfections  as  well.  He  is  the  object
of  the  yogis’  meditation,  by  which  they  achieve  mystic  perfections.  The  Lord  is  also
the  objective  of  the  cultivation  of  spiritual  knowledge,  and  the  performance  of  pious
activities.
PURPORT
The  Supreme  Lord  alone  is  the  object  of  the  various  abhidheyas,  or  paths  of
perfection, which are followed by all classes of human beings. The so-called perfection
attained  by  those  who  have  become  bewildered  by  self-centered  egoistic  conceptions
of life and have thus given up the service of the Supreme Lord is temporary and most
insignificant. The Supreme Lord is present everywhere and He is the ultimate goal of
all processes for attaining perfection in life.
aham ätmäntaro bähyo ‘nävåtaù sarva-dehinäm
yathä bhütäni bhüteñu bahir antaù svayaà tathä
Just as the material elements are situated within and outside all material bodies, in the
same way, I am also present within everything as the Supersoul and outside of everything
in My all-pervading feature.
COMMENTARY
It  is  said  that  the  Lord  is  situated  within  the  hearts  of  all  living  beings.  While
considering this, one might imagine that the Lord has separated Himself into innumerable
different identities. In this verse, however, the Lord explains that His existence cannot
be infringed upon by some mere material conditions. He remains unchanging in spite
of  displaying  so  many  manifestations.  Just  as  the  material  elements  are  situated  both
within and without all material bodies, so the Lord is all-pervading.
Thus  ends  the  translation  of  the  ninth  chapter  of  the  Uddhava-géta  entitled  “Lord
Kåñëa’s Description of Mystic Yoga Perfections,” with the commentaries of Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté Öhäkura and purports by Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 10
the Lord’s oPuLenCe
CHAPTER SUMMARY
In this chapter, the Supreme Lord describes His opulence in terms of His specific
potencies of knowledge, prowess, influence, and so on.
Çré Uddhava glorified Lord Çré Kåñëa by saying, “The Supreme Lord has no beginning
nor end and He is the cause of all living entities’ creation, maintenance, and destruction.
He is the Supersoul of all living entities and thus He witnesses all the activities of those
in  material  existence  by  remaining  within  their  hearts.  Still,  being  bewildered  by  the
Lord’s external energy, the conditioned souls cannot see Him.”
After offering these prayers at the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa, Çré Uddhava expressed
his desire to know about the Lord’s various opulences, as exhibited in heaven, on earth, in
hell, and in all directions. Lord Çré Kåñëa then described all these opulences in detail and
concluded by saying that all prowess, beauty, fame, opulence, modesty, charity, wonder,
good fortune, heroism, forgiveness, and wisdom that are manifest in the material world
are simply portions of His splendor. It therefore cannot be truthfully said that material
objects possess these opulences. Such conceptions arise from mentally combining two
ideas to produce an object that exists only in the imagination, like a flower in the sky.
Material objects are not essentially real, and so one should not concentrate his mind on
them. By regulating their speech, mind, and vital life air, with the help of intelligence,
devotees of the Lord perfect their existence in Kåñëa consciousness.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter  10
uddhava-gétä
´Î3{H 3HÌ=
çré-uddhava uväca
tvaà brahma paramaà säkñäd anädy-antam apävåtam
sarveñäm api bhävänäà träëa-sthity-apyayodbhavaù
Çré Uddhava said: My dear Lord, You are beginningless and without end, the Absolute
Truth Himself, uncovered by anything else. You are the protector and life-giver, as well as
the destruction and creation of all things that exist.
COMMENTARY
This chapter describes the Lord’s principal opulences, as well as the extent of His
influence and knowledge.
The previous chapter concluded with the statement that the lotus feet of the Supreme
Lord  are  the  original  cause  of  all  mystic  perfections.  After  hearing  this,  Uddhava
expressed  his  desire  to  know  more  about  Kåñëa’s  material  and  spiritual  opulence.  Çré
Uddhava glorified Lord Kåñëa as the supreme shelter of all. He said, “O Lord, You are
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Your form is eternal, You are without beginning,
and Your existence is not covered by anyone or anything. Although You appear to be
limited when You descend in Your human-like form, You are all-pervading. The original
creator of the cosmic manifestation, Lord Viñëu, is Your plenary portion. You are the
protector of everyone, You sustain everyone, and You maintain all living entities.”
PURPORT
The  Supreme  Brahman,  who  is  the  ultimate  cause  of  the  creation,  maintenance,
and annihilation of the visible material universe is Himself free of all kinds of material
designations.  He is not under  the  control of material  time because time  is one of His
countless manifestations.
uccävaceñu bhüteñu durjïeyam akåtätmabhiù
upäsate tväà bhagavan yäthä-tathyena brähmaëäù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Lord’s Opulence
My dear Lord, although it is difficult for those who are impious to understand how
You are situated in all superior and inferior creations, the brähmaëas who actually know
the Vedic conclusion worship You in all sincerity.
COMMENTARY
Uddhava  said:  Although  You  are  the  origin  of  the  viñëu-tattva  and  You  are
situated within all higher and lower species of life, ignorant and impious people cannot
appreciate  Your  glories.  On  the  other  hand,  brähmaëas  who  know  the  Vedas  as  Your
sound representation faithfully engage in Your worship.
PURPORT
The word uccävaca in this verse means “superior and inferior,” “higher and lower,” or
“great and insignificant.” When one possesses material objects, they gradually transform
before one’s very eyes because they are under the control of time. Therefore, to meditate
on  the  objects  of  the  senses  will  not  yield  a  permanent  result.  Those  who  know  the
Vedas search for the origin of material time, place, and the candidate, and thus come to
the conclusion that the devotional service of the Supreme Lord is the life’s actual goal.
yeñu yeñu ca bhüteñu bhaktyä tväà paramarñayaù
upäsénäù prapadyante saàsiddhià tad vadasva me
Please describe to me the perfections attained by the devotees who worship you with
great  and  transcendental  faith,  and  please  describe  the  transcendental  forms  of  Your
Lordship that they worship.
COMMENTARY
By worshiping various form of the Lord, one can achieve particular mystic perfections.
To hear about this is the request of Çré Uddhava.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter  10
uddhava-gétä
güòhaç carasi bhütätmä bhütänäà bhüta-bhävana
na tväà paçyanti bhütäni paçyantaà mohitäni te
O my Lord, maintainer of the living entities, You remain hidden within the hearts
of all living entities as the Supersoul. Being bewildered by Your energy, they cannot see
You, although You see everyone.
COMMENTARY
For those who are conditioned by the three modes of material nature, the opulence
of the Lord is incomprehensible. Uddhava said: “Despite Your presence as the Supersoul
in  all  living  entities,  the  conditioned  souls  cannot  see  You.  Although  You  are  the
benefactor of everyone, You remain hidden within their hearts so that they cannot see
You.” If one reads the word bhütabhävana without the visarga, Uddhava addresses the
Lord as, “O benefactor of all living entities.”
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is transcendentally situated, and thus beyond the reach of the
material senses. The foolish conditioned souls consider God to be their order supplier.
Materialistic men may sometimes appear to be very religious but because they consider
themselves  to  be  the  proprietors  of  God’s  creation,  their  prayers  are  simply  that  their
material desires may be fulfilled. Everything within the creation is owned and controlled
by  the  Supreme  Lord.  When  the  Lord  sometimes  appears  as  an  incarnation,  such
bewildered materialists generally take Him to be just another product of the modes of
material nature, being unable to appreciate His transcendental position.
yäù käç ca bhümau divi vai rasäyäà vibhütayo dikñu mahä-vibhüte
tä mahyam äkhyähy anubhävitäs te namämi te tértha-padäìghri-padmam
O  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  please  describe  to  me  Your  inconceivable
potencies, which You manifest on this earth, as well as all other planets throughout the
universe. I offer my obeisances at Your lotus feet, which are the shelter of all the holy
places of pilgrimage.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Lord’s Opulence
COMMENTARY
Uddhava said: “Because the understanding of Your opulence is most confidential,
You Yourself must reveal this knowledge. We can know about Your opulences only by
Your grace.” For the understanding of the conditioned souls, Uddhava requests the Lord
to explain how He expands His potencies by means of His various expansions. The word
vibhüti in this regard refers to the Lord’s material and spiritual potencies, as manifested
within our universe.
PURPORT
To remove the ignorance of the foolish conditioned souls, the Supreme Lord accepts
a  mood  of  magnanimity  and  acts  as  an  instructor.  The  conditioned  souls,  driven  by
the  desire  to  cultivate  knowledge  of  the  external  world,  are  unable  to  understand  the
existence of the Absolute Truth.
çré-bhagavän uväca
evam etad ahaà påñöaù praçnaà praçna-vidäà vara
yuyutsunä vinaçane sapatnair arjunena vai
The  Supreme  Lord  said:  O  best  among  those  who  inquire  about  the  truth,  at
Kurukñetra, as he prepared to confront his enemies, Arjuna asked Me this very question
that you have raised.
COMMENTARY
On the battlefield of Kurukçetra, Arjuna inquired in a similar manner.
jïätvä jïäti-vadhaà garhyam adharmaà räjya-hetukam
tato nivåtto hantähaà hato ‘yam iti laukikaù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter  10
uddhava-gétä
While seated on his chariot in the midst of the battlefield, Arjuna thought that killing
his  relatives  would  be  the  sinful  result  of  aspiring  to  fight  for  a  kingdom  to  rule.  He
wanted to leave the battlefield, thinking, “I don’t want to be the slayer of my relatives.”
COMMENTARY
Arjuna inquired about the Lord’s opulence at a time when he had refused to fight,
considering that to kill his relatives for the sake of enjoying a kingdom would be highly
irreligious. Arjuna thought of himself as the killer, and his relatives as those who would
be killed. These were his mundane conceptions.
sa tadä puruña-vyäghro yuktyä me pratibodhitaù
abhyabhäñata mäm evaà yathä tvaà raëa-mürdhani
I  enlightened  the  despondent  Arjuna,  a  tiger  among  men,  by  means  of  reason  and
argument.  In  the  midst  of  the  battlefield,  Arjuna  questioned  Me  just  as  you  are  now
inquiring.
aham ätmoddhaväméñäà bhütänäà suhåd éçvaraù
ahaà sarväëi bhütäni teñäà sthity-udbhaväpyayaù
My dear Uddhava, I am the Supersoul of all living entities and so I am naturally their
benefactor. I am the supreme controller and sustainer of all living entities, and the cause
of creation, maintenance, and destruction.
COMMENTARY
Lord Çré Kåñëa herein describes His opulence in general.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Lord’s Opulence
ahaà gatir gatimatäà kälaù kalayatäm aham
gunäëäà cäpy ahaà sämyaà guëiny autpattiko guëaù
I am the supreme destination for those who are trying to make progress, and I am
time for those who attempt to exert control over others. I am the equilibrium of the three
modes of material nature, and I am the natural ability of those who possess talent.
COMMENTARY
The essential nature of all material and spiritual objects is that they are manifestations
of the Lord’s opulence. The Supreme Lord is the actual objective for fruitive workers and
mental speculators. He is understood as time by those who delight in controlling others,
and among the qualities, He is the special quality that is exhibited by those who possess
some particular talent.
PURPORT
The Lord is the ultimate goal for all those who search after some kind of perfection
because  everything  is  simply  a  manifestation  of  His  unlimited  potencies.  The  results
obtained by fruitive workers are awarded by the Supreme Lord through the agency of
the demigods. Mental speculators may abandon the fruits of their labor but their quest is
to realize the all-pervading aspect of the Lord known as Brahman. Materialists run after
the temporary objects displayed by the Lord’s illusory energy and thus miss the chance
for self-realization. Those who reject material variegatedness and consider the Absolute
Truth  to  be  devoid  of  qualities  cannot  understand  how  the  Supreme  Lord  possesses
transcendental qualities. In  this way, it is seen that the Supreme Lord is the ultimate
goal of all kinds of people. Those who desire to enjoy the fruits of their labor, and those
who desire to become one with the Supreme are covered by the external energy of the
Lord. The actual goal of life is to engage in the Lord’s loving devotional service on the
transcendental platform
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter  10
uddhava-gétä
guëinäm apy ahaà sutra mahatäà ca mahän aham
sükñmäëäm apy ahaà jévo durjayänäm ahaà manaù
Among things that possess qualities I am the primary manifestation of nature, and
among great things I am the mahat-tattva, the total material manifestation. Among subtle
things,  I  am  the  spirit  soul,  and  among  things  that  are  difficult  to  conquer,  I  am  the
mind.
COMMENTARY
The word sütra indicates the primary manifestation of nature. Here, the Lord says,
“Among things that are difficult to control, I am the mind, and among subtle things, I
am the spirit soul.” This is also described in the Vedas:
eño ’ëur ätmä cetasä veditavyo yasmin präëaù païcadhä saàviveça
präëaiç cittaà sarvam otaà prajänäà yasmin viçuddhe vibhavaty eña ätmä
The soul is atomic in size and can be perceived by perfect intelligence. The
atomic soul is floating in the five kinds of air (präëa, apäna, vyäna, samäna, and
udäna), is situated within the heart, and spreads its influence all over the body
of the embodied living entities. When the soul is purified from the contamination
of  the  five  kinds  of  material  air,  its  spiritual  influence  is  exhibited.  (Muëòaka
Upaniñad 3.1.9)
Elsewhere, it is stated:
bälägra-çata-bhägasya çatadhä kalpitasya ca
bhägo jévaù vijïeyaù sa cänantyäya kalpate
When the upper point of a hair is divided into one hundred parts and again
each of such parts is further divided into one hundred parts, each such part is the
measurement of the dimension of the spirit soul. (Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 5.9)
The dimension of the spirit soul is smaller than the tip of an arrow. Although the
spirit soul is minute in size, like an atom, it is spread all over the body and its energy
works throughout the body. As a precious jewel or powerful medicine, although covered
by lac, manifests its effect when touched to the head, the minute size of the spirit soul
does not hamper his display of prowess.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Lord’s Opulence
hiraëyagarbho vedänäà manträëäà praëavas tri-våt
akñaräëäm a-käro ‘smi padäni cchandusäm aham
I am the original teacher of the Vedas, Hiraëyagarbha (Lord Brahmä), and among
mantras  I  am  the  three-lettered  oàkära.  Among  letters,  I  am  the  first  letter  “a”  (a-
käraù), and among sacred hymns, I am the Gäyatri mantra.
COMMENTARY
The Lord says that among the teachers of the Vedas, He is Hiraëyagarbha Brahmä,
and among the sacred hymns of the Vedas, He is the Gäyatri mantra.
indro ‘haà sarva-devänäà vasünäm asmi havya-väö
ädityänäm ahaà viñëü rudräëäà néla-lohitaù
Among  the  demigods,  I  am  Indra,  and  among  the  Vasus,  I  am  Agni.  Among  the
Ädityas, I am Viñëu, and among the Rudras, I am Çiva.
brahmarñéëäà bhågur ahaà räjarñéëäm ahaà manuù
devarñéëäà närado ‘haà havirdhäny asmi dhenuñu
Among great sages, I am Bhågu, and among saintly kings, I am Manu. I am Närada
Muni among saintly demigods, and among cows, I am the Kämadhenu.
COMMENTARY
The word havirddhäni refers to the cow known as Kämadhenu, or wish-fulfilling cow.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter  10
uddhava-gétä
siddheçvaräëäà kapilaù suparëo ‘haà patatriëäm
prajäpaténäà dakño ‘haà pitèëäm aham aryamä
Among  perfected  beings,  I  am  Kapila,  and  among  birds,  I  am  Garuòa.  Among
progenitors of mankind, I am Dakña, and among the forefathers, I am Aryamä.
mäà viddhy uddhava daityänäà prahlädam asureçvaram
somaà nakñatrauñadhénäà dhaneçaà yakña-rakñasäm
My  dear  Uddhava,  among  the  Daityas,  I  am  Prahläda  Mahäräja,  the  king  of  the
demons. Among the stars and medicinal herbs, I am the moon-god, and among the Yakñas
and Räkñasas, I am the god of wealth, Kuvera.
airävataà gajendräëäà yädasäà varuëaà prabhum
tapatäà dyumatäà süryaà manuñyäëäà ca bhü-patim
Among lordly elephants, I am Airävata, and among the aquatics, I am Varuëa, the
lord of the seas. Among things that heat and illuminate, I am the sun, and among human
beings, I am the king.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Lord’s Opulence
uccaiùçraväs turaìgäëäà dhätünäm asmi käïcanam
yamaù saàyamatäà cäham sarpäëäm asmi väsukiù
Among  horses,  I  am  Uccaiùçravä,  and  among  the  metals,  I  am  gold.  Among  those
who award punishment, I am Yamaräja, and among serpents, I am Väsuki.
nägendräëäm ananto ‘haà mågendraù çåìgi-daàñöriëäm
äçramäëäm ahaà turyo varëänäà prathamo ‘nagha
O  sinless  Uddhava,  among  the  foremost  of  Nägas,  I  am  Ananta,  and  among  those
animals who have sharp horns and teeth, I am the lion. Among the äçramas, I am the
fourth, the sannyäsa äçrama, and among the varëas, I am first, the brähmaëas.
térthänäà srotasäà gaìgä samudraù sarasäm aham
äyudhänäà dhanur ahaà tripura-ghno dhanuñmatäm
Among holy places and rivers, I am the Ganges, and among steady bodies of water, I am
the ocean. Among weapons, I am the bow, and among wielders of weapons, I am Lord Çiva.
dhiñëyänäm asmy ahaà merur gahanänäà himälayaù
vanaspaténäm açvattha oñadhénäm ahaà yavaù
Among  residences,  I  am  Mount  Sumeru,  and  among  unyielding  places,  I  am  the
Himälayas. Among trees, I am the açvattha, and among medicinal plants, I am barley.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter  10
uddhava-gétä
purodhasäà vasiñöho ‘haà brahmiñöhänäà båhaspatiù
skando ‘haà sarva-senänyäm agraëyäà bhagavän ajaù
Among priests, I am Vaçiñöha, and among those who are well-versed in the Vedas, I
am Båhaspati. Among military commanders, I am Käåtikeya, and among those who are
advancing in spiritual life, I am Brahmä.
yajïänäà brahma-yajïo ‘haà vratänäm avihiàsanam
väyv-agny-arkämbu-väg-ätmä çucénäm apy ahaà çuciù
Among sacrifices, I am the study of the Vedas, among vows, I am nonviolence. Among
all things that purify, I am the air, fire, the sun, water, and speech.
yogänäm ätma-saàrodho mantro ‘smi vijigéñatäm
änvékñiké kauçalänäà vikalpaù khyäti-vädinäm
Among the eight parts of añöäì ga-yoga, I am samädhi, whereby the soul is liberated
from illusion. Among those who desire victory, I am good moral council, among all types
of logical discrimination, I am the intelligence that allows one to discriminate between
matter and spirit, and among philosophers, I am the sense of discrimination.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Lord’s Opulence
stréëäà tu çatarüpähaà puàsäà sväyambhuvo manuù
näräyaëo munénäà ca kumäro brahmacäriëäm
Among women, I am Çatarüpa. and  among men, I am Sväyambhüva Manu. Among
sages, I am Näräyaëa, and among brahmacärés, I am Sanat-kumära.
dharmäëäm asmi sannyäsaù kñemäëäm abahir-matiù
guhyänäà su-nåtaà maunaà mithunänäm ajas tv aham
Among all religious principles, I am the renunciation of material enjoyment, and of
all types of welfare, I am realization of the eternal soul within the material body. Among
secret  things,  I  am  silence,  and  among  those  possessing  sexual  prowess,  I  am  Prajäpati
Brahmä.
COMMENTARY
In the Vedas, it is stated, arddho vä eña ätmä yat patni, which means “the wife is the
better half of a man’s body.”
saàvatsaro ‘smy animiñäm åtünäà madhu-mädhavau
mäsänäà märgaçérño ‘haà nakñaträëäà tathäbhijit
Among the cycles of time, I am the year, and among seasons, I am spring. Among
months, I am Märgaçérña (November-December), and among the stars, I am Abhijit.
COMMENTARY
It is stated in the Vedas that Abhijét is situated between uttaräñaòhä and çravaëä.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter  10
uddhava-gétä
ahaà yugänäà ca kåtaà dhéräëäà devalo ‘sitaù
dvaipäyano ‘smi vyäsänäà kavénäà kävya ätmavän
Among yugas, I am Satya-yuga, the age of truth, and among sober sages, I am Devala
and  Asita.  Among  those  who  divided  the  Vedas,  I  am  Kåñëa  Dvaipäyaëa  Vedavyäsa,
and among learned scholars, I am the wise Çukräcärya, who is learned in the spiritual
science.
väsudevo bhagavatäà tvaà tu bhägavateñv aham
kimpuruñänäà hanuman vidyädhräëäà sudarçanaù
Among personalities who are entitled to be called Bhagavän, I am Väsudeva, and you,
Uddhava, represent Me among the devotees. Among the Kimpuruñas, I am  Hanumän,
and among the Vidyädharas, I am Sudarçana.
ratnänäà padma-rägo ‘smi padma-koçaù su-peçasäm
kuço ‘smi darbha-jäténäà gavyam äjyaà haviùñv aham
Among jewels, I am the ruby, and among beautiful things, I am the whorl of the lotus.
Among grasses, I am the sacred kuça grass, and among oblations meant for sacrifice, I am
cow’s ghee.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Lord’s Opulence
vyavasäyinäm ahaà lakñméù kitavänäà chala-grahaù
titikñäsmi titikñüëäà sattvaà sattvavatäm aham
I am the wealth of those who are enterprising, and among the cheaters, I am gambling.
I am the forgiveness of those who are tolerant, and I am the good qualities of those who
are situated in the mode of goodness.
ojaù saho balavatäà karmähaà viddhi sätvatäm
sätvatäà nava-mürténäm ädi-mürtir ahaà parä
Of those who are exceptionally powerful, I am mental and physical strength, and I am
the devotional activities of the devotees. Among the nine forms worshiped by devotees, I
am Väsudeva.
COMMENTARY
The  Personality  of  Godhead  expands  as  Väsudeva,  Saìkarñaëa,  Pradyumna,
Aniruddha, Näräyaëa, Hayagréva, Varäha, and Nåsiàha, and sometimes He accepts the
post of Brahmä. It has been explained that when no one is qualified to occupy the post
of Brahmä, the Lord Himself accepts this position. Lord Viñëu also sometimes appears
as Indra. During the reign of Sväyambhüva Manu, Lord Viñëu appeared as Indra, and in
some kalpas, Lord Viñëu appeared as Brahmä.
viçvävasuù pürvacittir gandharväpsarasäm aham
bhüdharäëäm ahaà sthairyaà gandha-mätram ahaà bhuvaù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter  10
uddhava-gétä
Among the Gandharvas, I am Viçvävasu, and among the Apsaräs, I am Pürvacitti. I
am the immovability of mountains and I am the original fragrance of the earth.
COMMENTARY
The  world  mäträ  indicates  the  original  fragrance  of  the  earth.  In  the  Bhagavad-
gétä (7.9) Lord Kåñëa says, puëyo gandhaù påthivyäà ca: “I am the original fragrance of
the earth.” The original fragrance of the earth is very pleasing and it represents Lord
Kåñëa.
apäà rasaç ca paramas tejiñöhänäà vibhävasuù
prabhä süryendu-täräëäà çabdo ‘haà nabhasaù paraù
I  am  the  taste  of  water,  and  I  am  the  light  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars.  I  am  the
transcendental sound vibration heard within the sky.
COMMENTARY
By the use of the word parama, or “excellent,” other tastes, such as sour and bitter,
have  been  rejected.  The  word  para  in  this  verse  is  used  to  indicate  transcendental
sound.
brahmaëyänäà balir ahaà véräëäm aham arjunaù
bhütänäà sthitir utpattir ahaà vai pratisaìkramaù
Among  those  who  are  dedicated  to  maintaining  brahminical  culture,  I  am  Bali
Mahäräja, the son of Virocana, and among heroic warriors, I am Arjuna. Indeed, I am
the creation, maintenance, and annihilation of all living entities.
COMMENTARY
The word pratisaàkramaù refers to annihilation.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Lord’s Opulence
gaty-ukty-utsargopädänam änanda-sparça-lakñanam
äsväda-çruty-avaghräëam ahaà sarvendriyendriyam
I am the functions of the legs, such as walking, and I am the functions of the hands,
such  as  picking  up.  I  am  speaking,  evacuation,  the  pleasure  of  the  genitals,  touching,
seeing,  tasting,  hearing,  and  smelling.  I  am  the  potency  by  which  each  of  the  senses
experiences its particular sense object.
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa provides the potency whereby the five working senses
and the five knowledge-acquiring senses can act. This is confirmed in the Vedas, wherein
it is stated that the Lord supplies the energy whereby the senses can abstract pleasure
from the sense objects.
påthivé väyur äkäça äpo jyotir ahaà mahän
vikäraù puruño ‘vyaktaà rajaù sattvaà tamaù param
aham etat prasaìkhyänaà jïänaà tattva-viniçcayaù
I am the form, taste, smell, touch, and sound; false ego; the mahat-tattva; the five
gross  material  elements;  the  eleven  senses;  the  spirit  soul,  material  nature,  the  three
modes of material nature, goodness, passion and ignorance; as well as the transcendental
Lord. I am all of these things, as well as the knowledge of their characteristics and the
conviction brought about by this knowledge.
COMMENTARY
After giving a detailed summary of His opulences within this world, the Lord now
describes the opulences that are expansions of His effulgence.  The word påthivé, or earth,
indicates its subtle fragrance. The word ahaà refers to ahaìkära, or false ego. The word
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter  10
uddhava-gétä
mahän refers to the mahat-tattva. These seven are transformations of material nature.
The five gross material elements are earth, water, fire, air, and sky. The eleven senses
include the five working senses, the five knowledge-acquiring senses, and the mind. The
word puruña refers to the living entity. Thus, the total number of items is twenty-five.
In the Säìkhya philosophy, the three modes of material nature—goodness, passion, and
ignorance—are also included. These are all opulences of the Supreme Lord.
mayeçvareëa jévena guëena guëinä vinä
sarvätmanäpi sarveëa na bhävo vidyate kvacit
As  the  Absolute  Truth,  I  am  the  origin  of  the  living  entity,  the  three  modes  of
material nature, and the mahat-tattva. I am in one sense everything, and so nothing can
exist without Me.
COMMENTARY
When  the  mahat-tattva,  or  total  material  existence,  combines  with  the  jévas,  or
living  entities,  this  material  world  becomes  manifest.  Everything  that  we  experience
within  this  world  is  a  combination  of  the  living  entity  and  the  material  energy.  The
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  is  the  origin  of  both  the  living  entities  and  matter.
Thus it should be concluded that nothing can exist without the mercy of the Supreme
Lord.
PURPORT
The  cosmic  manifestation  is  a  combination  of  the  Supreme  Lord’s  two  energies,
the living entities and the illusory energy, Maya. Because the energy and the energetic
are ultimately one, when we speak of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, all of His
energies  are  automatically  included.  One  should  never  make  the  mistake  of  equating
the temporary material nature with the eternal spiritual abode of the Lord. One should
not conclude that the perverted nature of material existence also exists in the eternal
realm, which is full of spiritual variegatedness. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is
the entire basis of the existence of both the living entity and matter.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Lord’s Opulence
saìkhyänaà paramäëünäà kälena kriyate mayä
na tathä me vibhüténäà såjato ‘ëòäni koöiçaù
Although it might be possible for Me to count all the atoms within the universe, I
could never count all the opulences that I manifest within the innumerable universes.
COMMENTARY
In  this  verse,  the  Supreme  Lord  gives  a  hint  of  the  extent  of  His  opulence.  The
Supreme Lord said, “It is certainly possible for Me to count the number of atoms in the
universe, but it is impossible for anyone to estimate the extent of My opulence. When
there  is  no  estimate  of  the  innumerable  universes  that  I  have  created,  how  can  the
opulence that is present within those innumerable universes be estimated?”
tejaù çréù kértir aiçvaryaà hrés tyägaù saubhagaà bhagaù
véryaà titikñä vijïänaà yatra yatra sa me ‘àçakaù
Whatever  prowess,  beauty,  fame,  opulence,  modesty,  renunciation,  good  fortune,
mental and sensual pleasure, strength, forgiveness, and knowledge of the self one finds in
existence are but manifestations of a portion of My splendor.
COMMENTARY
The word teja in this verse means “influence,” and the word çré means “opulence.”
The word saubhagam refers to that which is pleasing to the mind and the senses. The
word  bhaga  means  “good  fortune,”  the  word  vérya  means  “strength,”  and  the  word
aàçaka means “portion of.”
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter  10
uddhava-gétä
etäs te kértitäù sarväù  saìkñepeëa vibhütayaù
mano-vikärä evaite yathä väcäbhidhéyate
I have thus briefly described to you My manifestation of opulences, as well as some of
the characteristics of the material creation that can be perceived by the conditioned souls
and thus defined in various ways.
COMMENTARY
The Lord’s external opulences are herein referred to as mano-vikäräù, which means
that  they  are  perceived  in  various  ways,  according  to  a  conditioned  soul’s  mentality.
The word väcäbhidhéyate indicates the same thing—that conditioned souls describe the
nature of the universe according to their capacity, or mentality. It is for this reason that
the external opulence of the Lord is considered inferior and not the direct manifestation
of the Lord. The same person can evoke opposing conceptions within the mind of the
conditioned soul. In a favorable state of mind, one designates someone as “my son,” “my
father,” “my husband,” “my friend,” and so on, forgetting that everyone is an eternal part
and  parcel  of  the  Lord.  Similarly,  in  a  negative  state  of  mind,  one  may  thinks,  “This
person is my enemy,” and so on, forgetting that everyone is the Lord’s eternal servant.
The example can be given of the demigod Indra, who is a manifestation of the Lord’s
material opulence, and is thus considered in various ways. Indra’s wife, mother, son, and
guru  naturally  think  of  him  in  favorable  terms,  whereas  the  demons  think  of  him  as
their enemy. It is for this reason that the Lord’s material opulences are referred to here
as  mano-vikära.  Such  relative  perceptions  are  certainly  material  because  they  fail  to
express the truth, that all living entities are the Lord’s eternal parts and parcels. When
a  devotee  sees  Lord  Kåñëa  as  the  origin  and  proprietor  of  all  kinds  of  opulence,  and
therefore renounces the desire to enjoy or possess them, these opulences are considered
spiritual. In such consciousness, although one remains within the material world, one
sees the opulences of the Lord as they are.
PURPORT
Opulence  herein  refers  to  the  visible  objects  as  perceived  according  to  the
transformations of the mind. Such mundane perception of opulence cannot give a clear
understanding of the supremacy of the Lord’s actual position. One should not wrongly
assume that such insignificant material opulences occupy the same status as the Lord’s
plenary features in His position as the Personality of Godhead, which are qualitatively
and quantitatively equal to the Lord.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Lord’s Opulence
väcaà yaccha mano yaccha präëän yacchedriyäëi ca
ätmänam ätmanä yaccha na bhüyaù kalpase ‘dhvane
Therefore, control your speech, subdue the mind, conquer the life air, and regulate the
senses, and bring your rational faculties under control by means of purified intelligence.
By doing so, you will never again fall down to the path of material existence.
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Lord said, “Because everything is a manifestation of My opulence, you
should  respect  all  things  by  means  of  your  body,  mind,  and  speech.  You  should  never
chastise or blaspheme anyone out of envy.”
It is stated in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (12.6.35):
ativädäàs titikñeta nävamanyeta kaïcana
na cemaà deham äçritya vairaà kurvéta kenacit
One should tolerate all the insults of others, and never fail to show proper
respect to everyone. Avoiding identification with the material body, one should
not create enmity with anyone.
PURPORT
If we carefully control the activities of our speech, mind, and senses, then we will
never come under the sway of the illusory energy of the Lord, thinking of ourselves as
the enjoyer. In that condition of self-control, one resides in the spiritual kingdom, which
is situated beyond this material realm of anxiety.
tasya vrataà tapo dänaà  sravaty äma-ghaöämbu-vat
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter  10
uddhava-gétä
A transcendentalist who does not completely control his speech and mind by superior
intelligence will find his vows, austerities, and charity, lost just as water flows out of an
unbaked clay pot.
COMMENTARY
Despite accepting the renounced order of life, if one does not carefully control his
speech and mind, then his spiritual practices, such as the execution of vows, performance
of austerities, and the charity of leading others to spiritual life will be lost, just as water
kept in an unbaked clay pot leaks out and is lost.
PURPORT
If  a  liquid  is  kept  in  a  baked  clay  pitcher,  it  will  not  leak  out,  but  if  it  is  kept  in
an unbaked clay vessel, it will gradually flow out of the container. Similarly, for those
who  cannot  follow  the  principles  of  the  tridaëòés,  there  is  no  possibility  of  achieving
perfection.
tasmäd vaco manaù präëän niyacchen mat-paräyaëaù
mad-bhakti-yuktayä buddhyä tataù parisamäpyate
A devotee who is surrendered to Me should carefully control his mind, speech, and
life air. By engaging his intelligence in My loving devotional service, the devotee attains
the perfection of life.
PURPORT
In this verse, it is stressed that one’s intelligence should be saturated with feelings of
loving devotion for the Lord. This can be developed by regularly chanting the Gäyatré
mantra,  which  is  awarded  by  the  spiritual  master.  By  means  of  clear  intelligence,
one  naturally  becomes  disinclined  to  perform  fruitive  activities,  or  engage  in  mental
speculation,  and  one  naturally  becomes  inclined  to  take  shelter  of  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
Thus  ends  the  translation  of  the  tenth  chapter  of  the  Uddhava-géta,  entitled  “The
Lord’s  Opulence”  with  the  commentaries  of  Çréla  Viçvanätha  Cakravarté  Öhäkura  and
the chapter summary and purports of Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 11
Lord Kåñëa’s desCrIPtIon of the varëäÇrama system
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Previously, Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa, had assumed the form of Haàsa and explained
to Lord Brahmä and other sages the duties of the brahmacäré and gåhastha orders. In
this chapter, the Lord further describes these matters to Uddhava.
After  Uddhava  inquires  from  Çré  Kåñëa  about  the  principles  of  the  varëa  and
äçrama orders of society, the Lord replies that in the first age, Satya-yuga, there was only
one varëa, called haàsa. In that age, people were automatically dedicated to unalloyed
devotional  service  right  from  their  very  birth,  and  since  everyone  was  perfect  in  all
respects, the age was called Kåta-yuga. In that age, the Vedas were manifest in the form
of the sacred syllable  oà. The Supreme Lord was the object of everyone’s meditation,
and all the limbs of religion were fully manifested. There were no formal performances
of Vedic sacrifices. People were naturally pious and inclined to perform austerities, and
they simply engaged in meditation on the personal form the Supreme Lord.
In the following age, Tretä-yuga, the three Vedas became manifest from the heart
of the Supreme Lord, and from them, the three forms of sacrificial fire. At that time,
the  system  of  four  varëas  and  four  äçramas,  which  prescribes  material  and  spiritual
duties for the different members of society, manifested from the limbs of the Supreme
Lord. According to how these divisions appeared from the higher and lower bodily limbs
of  the  Supreme  Lord,  they  were  endowed  with  higher  and  lower  qualities.  After  this
description, the Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa, explains the nature of those in each of the
four varëas, as well as those who are outside the limits of the four varëas. The Lord also
describes those qualities that pertain to humanity in general.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
324 Chapter 11
Members of the higher social orders are qualified to take second birth. After receiving
the  sacred  thread  initiation,  they  should  go  to  live  in  the  gurukula,  the  home  of  the
spiritual  master,  as  brahmacärés.  There,  the  student  should  practice  self-control  and
absorb himself in the study of the Vedas. He should keep matted hair and is forbidden
to wash his teeth, prepare a nice seat for himself, talk while bathing or evacuating, cut
his hair and nails, or at any time pass semen. He must regularly perform worship at the
three junctures of the day and must render devotional service to his spiritual master in
a spirit free from envy. A brahmacäré must offer to the guru whatever food and other
things he collects by begging. He gladly accepts for his maintenance whatever remnants
of  the  Lord  he  is  granted.  He  should  render  menial  service  to  the  spiritual  master  by
massaging  his  feet  and  worship  him,  and  he  should  avoid  all  sense  gratification  and
strictly  maintain  the  vow  of  celibacy.  He  should  surrender  himself  completely  to  the
Supreme  Lord,  and  engage  in  worshiping  Him  in  the  form  of  Paramätmä,  according
to  the  rules  and  regulations  prescribed  for  him.  For  brahmacärés,  seeing  or  touching
women, and conversations or sports in the company of women, are absolutely disallowed.
Maintaining cleanliness and performing äcamana for purification are recommended for
members of all the äçramas. Everyone is advised to remember that the Supreme Lord as
the Supersoul is residing within all living entities.
After studying all the different aspects of the Vedas, a brähmaëa who has material
desires may, with the permission of his spiritual master, enter household life. Otherwise,
if he has no material desires, he may enter the  vänaprastha or sannyäsa äçrama. The
proper order of succession should be followed in changing from one spiritual order to the
next. One who desires to enter household life should accept a wife who is of the same
varëa as himself, who is not condemnable, and who is younger than he.
The  obligatory  duties  of  the  brähmaëas,  kñatriyas,  and  vaiçyas  are  worship  of  the
Supreme Lord, study of the Vedas, and giving charity. Only brähmaëas have the privilege
of accepting charity, teaching the Vedic scriptures to others, and conducting sacrifices.
If a brähmaëa finds some fault in these three occupations, he may maintain himself by
collecting grains from the agricultural fields. If a brähmaëa is extremely poverty-stricken
and thus in dire need of money, he may accept the profession of a kñatriyas or vaiçya, but
he should never accept the occupation of a çüdra. In a similar situation, a kñatriya may
accept the occupation of a vaiçya, and a vaiçya that of a çüdra. When such an emergency
has passed so that there is no more imminent danger, one should not continue to earn
his  livelihood  by  means  of  a  lower  occupation.  A  brähmaëa  who  remains  fixed  in
performing his occupational duties while giving up insignificant material desires always
remains under the protection of the Supreme Lord. The householder should study the
Vedas daily, and maintain his family members with the wealth he has honestly earned
by engaging in his occupation, and he should worship the Supreme Lord according to
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of the Varëäçrama System
his capacity. Remaining unattached to family life and fixed in devotion to the Supreme
Lord,  a  householder  may  finally  accept  the  vänaprastha  äçrama,  or  if  he  has  a  grown
up  son,  he  may  directly  take  sannyäsa  in  order  to  completely  devote  his  time  to  the
worship of the Supreme Lord. But persons who are extremely lusty after women, who
have no power of discrimination, and who are mad after earning wealth and amassing
possessions, remain in constant anxiety over the well-being of their family members and
are doomed to take their next birth in a lower species of life.
TEXTS 1-2
´Î3{H 3HÌ=
çré-uddhava uväca
yas tvayäbhihitaù pürvaà dharmas tvad-bhakti-lakñaëaù
varëäçamäcäravatäà sarveñäà dvi-padäm api
yathänuñöhéyamänena tvayi bhaktir nåëäà bhavet
sva-dharmeëäravindäkña tan mamäkhyätum arhasi
Çré  Uddhava  said:  My  dear  Lord,  You  have  described  the  principles  of  devotional
service that are performed by the followers of the varnäçrama system, as well as those
who lead unregulated lives. O lotus-eyed Lord, kindly tell me how people can attain Your
loving service by the execution of their prescribed duties.
COMMENTARY
After  hearing  from  Kåñëa  about  the  processes  of  jïäna-yoga,  bhakti-yoga,  and
añöäìga-yoga,  Uddhava  now  inquires  about  the  practice  of  karma-yoga  as  a  means  of
attaining perfection.  The Supreme Lord had previously said:
kälena nañöä pralaye väëéyaà veda-saàjïitä
mayädau brahmaëe proktä dharmo yasyäà mad-ätmakaù
The Supreme Lord said: By the influence of time, the transcendental Vedic
knowledge  was  lost  at  the  time  of  annihilation.  Then,  when  the  subsequent
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
326 Chapter 11
creation took place, I imparted the Vedic knowledge to Brahmä because I Myself
am the principles of religion enunciated therein. (Çrémad-Bhägavatam 11.14.3)
Religious  principles  are  delineated  in  the  Vedic  literature.  Devotional  service,
which  is  the  perfection  of  religion,  is  divided  into  three  categories—kevalä-bhakti,
pradhänébhütä-bhakti and guëébhütä-bhakti. Of the three, kevalä-bhakti can be executed
by members of all the äçramas. Indeed, even those who are outside the purview of the
varnäçrama  society  can  engage  in  unmotivated  devotional  service  if  they  faithfully
associate  with  saintly  devotees.  There  is  no  other  way  for  attaining  perfection  other
than to attain the association of pure devotees. The Lord has confirmed this:
yaà na yogena säìkhyena däna-vrata-tapo-’dhvaraiù
vyäkhyä-svädhyäya-sannyäsaiù präpnuyäd yatnavän api
Even though others engaged with great endeavor in the mystic yoga system,
philosophical speculation, giving charity, executing vows and penances, performing
ritualistic  sacrifices,  teaching  the  Vedic  mantras  to  others,  a  personal  study  of
the Vedas, or the renounced order of life, they could not achieve Me. (Çrémad-
Bhägavatam 11.12.9)
If one associates with saintly devotees then he can attain pure devotional service,
whether he follows the principles of varnäçrama or not.
dharmän santyajya yaù sarvän mäà bhajeta sa tu sattamaù
One who gives up all ordinary religious principles to worship Me alone is the
foremost among human beings. (Çrémad-Bhägavatam 11.11.32)
Pradhänébhütä-bhakti and guëébhütä-bhakti are also awakened by the association of
devotees and from the execution of one’s occupational duties. The Supreme Lord alone
knows how one can receive the seed of the creeper of devotional service unto Him. The
word bhakti in this verse refers to pradhänébhütä-bhakti and guëébhütä-bhakti.
TEXTS 3-7
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of the Varëäçrama System
purä kila mahä-bäho dharmaà paramakaà prabho
yat tena haàsa-rüpeëa brahmaëe ‘bhyättha mädhava
sa idänéà su-mahatä kälenämitra-karçana
na präyo bhavitä martya-loke präg anuçäsitaù
vaktä kartävitä nänyo dharmasyäcyuta te bhuvi
sabhäyäm api vairiïcyäà yatra mürti-dharäù kaläù
karträviträ pravakträ ca bhavatä madhusüdana
tyakte mahé-tale deva vinañöaà kaù pravakñyati
tat tvaà naù sarva-dharma-jïa dharmas tvad-bhakti-lakñaëaù
yathä yasya vidhéyeta tathä varëaya me prabho
O mighty armed-one! My dear Lord, previously, as Lord Haàsa, You spoke to Lord
Brahmä about the religious principles that bring supreme happiness to the follower. My
dear Mädhava, much time has now passed, so that what You had previously instructed
will soon be forgotten. O subduer of the enemy, O Lord Acyuta, You are the sole protector
of  religious  principles.  My  dear  Lord  Madhusüdana,  You  are  the  actual  propounder  of
religious principles. When You return to Your own abode, who will continue to propagate
the true understanding of religious principles? My dear Lord, as the perfect knower of
religious principles, please describe to me the path of devotional service, and tell me the
qualifications of one who is to traverse this path.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
328 Chapter 11
COMMENTARY
There  are  eighteen  divisions  of  knowledge,  as  described  in  the  Vedic  literature:
the  four  Vedas—Åg,  Säma,  Yajur,  and  Atharva—Puräëas,  Nyäya-çästra,  Mémamsä,
Dharma-çästra,  Kalpa,  Vyäkaraëa,  Nirukta,  Jyotiña,  Chanòa,  Ayurveda,  Dhanurveda,
Gandharvaveda, and Artha-çästra.
PURPORT
In the beginning of creation, the first created being, Brahmä, received knowledge
of  the  supreme  religious  principles  from  Lord  Haàsa.  From  Him,  Brahmä  and  the
brähmaëas attained an understanding of the  ekäyaëa process of spiritual practice. In
the course of time, however, misguided transcendentalists began to practice the supreme
religious principles, which are based on the devotional service of the Lord, in a perverted
manner.  When  a  pure  spirit  soul  becomes  materially  contaminated,  he  gives  up  the
supreme  religious  principle  of  devotional  service  to  the  Lord  and  becomes  inclined
to  perform  fruitive  activities,  engage  in  the  cultivation  of  knowledge,  or  endeavor  for
perfection  in  mystic  yoga.  These  activities  are  illusory  because  they  are  based  on  the
material conception of life and have nothing to do with the constitutional position of
the living entity. Sanätana dharma refers to devotional service alone.
´Î¯Ì¸d 3HÌ=
çré-çuka uväca
Itthaà sva-bhåtya-mukhyena påñöaù sa bhagavän hariù
prétaù kñemäya martyänäà dharmän äha sanätanän
Çré  Çukadeva  Gosvämé  said:  Çré  Uddhava,  the  foremost  of  devotees,  thus  inquired
from  the  Lord.  The  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Çré  Kåñëa,  was  pleased  to  hear
the words of His devotee, and for the benefit of everyone, He described eternal religious
principles.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of the Varëäçrama System
çré-bhagavän uväca
dharmya eña tava praçno naiùçreyasa-karo nåëäm
varëäçramäcäravatäà tam uddhava nibodha me
The  Supreme  Lord  said:  My  dear  Uddhava,  your  question  is  glorious  because  it  is
in  accordance  with  religious  principles  and  thus  leads  the  followers  of  varëäçrama  to
life’s ultimate goal, pure devotional service. Now, listen attentively as I talk about eternal
religious principles.
COMMENTARY
The word dharman refers to the supreme religious principles.
PURPORT
The  religious  principles  prescribed  for  ordinay  men  are  far  different  from  eternal
religious  principles  prescribed  for  the  devotees  of  the  Lord.  Ordinary  persons  are
materialistic and so their religious principles are simply meant to gradually elevate them
to the mode of goodness. Discussion of eternal religious principles are the most auspicious
topics for civilized human beings. The varëäçrama system is a social order based upon
religious principles that gradually leads one to the point of Kåñëa consciousness.
ädau kåta-yuge varëo nåëäà haàsa iti småtaù
kåta-kåtyäù prajä jätyä tasmät kåta-yugaà viduù
In the beginning, in Satya-yuga, there was only one social class, known as haàsa,
to  which  all  human  beings  belonged.  In  that  age,  human  beings  engaged  in  unalloyed
devotional service, right from their birth, and thus learned scholars called this first age
Kåta-yuga.
COMMENTARY
Çré  Kåñëa  is  instructing  Uddhava  about  varnäçrama-dharma,  beginning  from  its
inception.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
330 Chapter 11
PURPORT
The  period  of  time  when  human  beings  were  not  polluted  by  the  three  modes  of
material nature is called Kåta-yuga, or Satya-yuga. Ekäyaëa paddhati refers to the period
of time when the varëas were not divided. That undivided varëa was known as haàsa.
The Supersoul is referred to as haàsa and the devotees are those who are maintained
by the haàsa.
vedaù praëava evägre dharmo ‘haà våña-rüpa-dhåk
upäsate tapo-niñöhä haàsaà mäà mukta-kilbiñäù
In Satya-yuga, the undivided Veda is expressed by the syllable, oà, and I am manifest
as the four-legged bull of religion. The pious inhabitants of that age are fixed in austerity,
and with their mind and senses fully under control, they meditate on My transcendental
form as Haàsa.
PURPORT
The four legs of the bull represent the four parts of the Lord’s opulence as manifested
in  this  world.  The  condensed  form  of  the  Lord’s  holy  name  in  the  form  of  oà  is  the
origin of the Vedas.
tretä-mukhe mahä-bhäga präëän me hådayät trayé
vidyä prädurabhüt tasyä aham äsaà tri-vån makhaù
O  greatly  fortunate  one,  at  the  beginning  of  Tretä-yuga,  Vedic  knowledge  was
manifested  from  My  heart,  which  is  the  shelter  of  the  life  air.  The  Vedas  appeared  in
three  divisions—the  Åg,  Säma,  and  Yajur.  From  the  three  Vedas,  I  manifested  three
kinds of sacrifice.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of the Varëäçrama System
COMMENTARY
The  Supreme  Lord  said:  “From  the  heart  of  My  universal  form  appeared  the
three  Vedas,  and  from  them  appeared  the  three  kinds  of  sacrifice,  known  as  hautra,
ädhvaryava, and audgätra.” It is described in the scriptures that Lord Viñëu appeared in
His form as Yajïa.
PURPORT
When one leg of religion was lost, the three Vedas— Åg, Säma, and Yajur—came
into  being.  The  three  performers  of  Vedic  sacrifices,  known  as  hotä,  udgäta,  and
adhvaryyu, also appeared.
vipra-kñatriya-viö-çüdrä mukha-bähüru-päda-jäù
vairäjät puruñäj jätä ya ätmäcära-lakñaëäù
In  Tretä-yuga,  the  four  varëas—the  brähmaëas,  kñatriyas,  vaiçyas,  and  çudras—
along with their occupational duties and characteristics, appeared from the mouth, arms,
thigh, and legs of the universal form of the Lord, respectively.
COMMENTARY
In the beginning of creation, the natural propensities of the spirit souls were manifest
but gradually, in the course of time, their qualities and nature became contaminated.
PURPORT
The four social orders of human society came into existence from four parts of the
Lord’s  universal  form—His  mouth,  arm,  thighs,  and  legs.  In  this  way,  human  beings
were divided into four classes, according to their qualities and propensities for work.
gåhäçramo jaghanato brahmacaryaà hådo mama
vakñaù-sthaläd vane-väsaù sannyäsaù çirasi sthitaù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
332 Chapter 11
The  married  order  of  life,  the  gåhastha äçrama,  appeared  from  the  loins  of  My
universal  form,  and  the  celibate  students,  the bramacarya äçrama,  appeared  from  My
heart. The forest-dwelling retired order of life, the vänaprastha äçrama, appeared from
My  chest,  and  the  renounced  order  of  life,  the  sannyäsa äçrama,  appeared  from  My
head.
COMMENTARY
The heart is considered to be below the chest.
varëänäm äçramäëäà ca janma-bhümy-anusäriëéù
äsan prakåtayo nènäà nécair nécottamottamäù
The four varëas and four äçramas were then manifested according to the higher and
lower natures of  the conditioned souls.
COMMENTARY
The brähmaëas and sannyäsés are situated on the head of the universal form of the
Lord,  and  are  thus  considered  to  be  the  most  important  members  of  the  social  body.
The çüdras and gåhasthas are situated on the legs and abdomen of the universal form
of the  Lord and so they are considered to be inferior in status. Everyone is born with a
particular intelligence and social position and in consideration of these, one is placed
within the varëäçrama system.
PURPORT
The brähmaëa varëa and the sannyäsa äçrama are situated in the highest position
of  the  Lord’s  universal  form,  and  thus  they  are  in  the  topmost  positions  of  society.
Because kñatriyas and vänaprasthas are situated on the Lord’s arms and chest, they are
also considered to be in superior positions. The vaiçya varëa and bramacarya äçrama
are  situated  on  lower limbs  of  the  universal  form and  so they  are  accepted  as  inferior
statuses. The çudras and gåhasthas are accepted as having an even lower status. This is
the situation of the social and spiritual orders within the varëäçrama system.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of the Varëäçrama System
çamo damas tapaù çaucaà santoñaù kñäntir ärjavam
mad-bhaktiç ca dayä satyaà brahma-prakåtayas tv imäù
Peacefulness, control of the senses, austerity, cleanliness, satisfaction, forgiveness,
simplicity,  devotion  to  Me,  compassion,  and  truthfulness  are  the  natural  qualities  of
brähmaëas.
COMMENTARY
The phrase mad-bhakti refers to guëébhütä-bhakti.
PURPORT
One cannot find much lust or anger in the nature of a brähmaëa. For this reason, a
brähmaëa does not indulge in unrestricted sense gratification but instead, takes pleasure
in discussing devotional literature. Purity, steadiness due to an absence of dissatisfaction,
tolerance,  simplicity,  inclination  toward  the  Lord’s  service,  compassion  for  all  living
entities, and truthfulness—these eight characteristics are to be found in brähmaëas.
tejo balaà dhåtiù çauryaà titikñaudäryam udyamaù
sthairyaà brahmanyam aiçvaryaà kñatra-prakåtayas tv imäù
Prowess,  bodily  strength,  patience,  heroism,  tolerance,  magnanimity,  enthusiasm,
steadiness,  devotion  to  the  brähmaëas,  and  leadership,  are  the  natural  qualities  of  the
kñatriyas.
PURPORT
Kñatriyas naturally possess great prowess, patience, heroism, tolerance, magnanimity,
enthusiasm, steadiness, devotion, and leadership.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
334 Chapter 11
ästikyaà däna-niñöhä ca adambho brahma-sevanam
Atuñöir arthopacayair vaiçya-prakåtayas tv imäù
Faith  in  Vedic  culture,  an  inclination  to  give  charity,  freedom  from  pride,  service
to the brähmaëas, and a perpetual desire to accumulate more and more money are the
natural qualities of the vaiçyas.
PURPORT
True vaiçyas are not mere businessmen. They have faith in the eternity of the soul,
take pleasure in giving charity, are free from false pride, serve those who are well-versed
in the Vedic literature, and have a continuous thirst for accumulating wealth.
çuçrüñaëaà dvija-gaväà devänäà cäpy amäyayä
tatra labdhena santoñaù çüdra-prakåtayas tv imäù
Service without duplicity to the brähmaëas, cows, demigods, and other worshipable
personalities, and satisfaction with whatever is obtained by such service, are the natural
qualities of çüdras.
COMMENTARY
In Vedic society, çudras are satisfied by whatever they receive as remuneration for
services rendered because the higher classes of men are trained to be charitable toward
those who are less fortunate, and thus they never lack the necessities of life.
açaucam anåtaà steyaà nästikyaà çuñka-vigrahaù
kämaù krodhaç ca tarñaç ca sa bhävo ‘ntyävasäyinäm
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of the Varëäçrama System
Lack of cleanliness, dishonesty, thievery, very little faith in God, unnecessary quarrel,
lust, anger, and great hankering are the nature of the lowest among men, who are outside
the varëäçrama system.
COMMENTARY
This verse describes the qualities of those who live outside the varëäçrama system.
Such persons are referred to as antyaja.
ahiàsä satyam asteyam akäma-krodha-lobhatä
bhüta-priya-hitehä ca dharmo ‘yaà särva-varëikaù
Nonviolence, truthfulness, honesty, desire for the happiness and welfare of all others,
and freedom from lust, anger, and greed, constitute duties for all members of society.
COMMENTARY
The  phrase  särvavarëikaù  refers  not  only  to  those  acting  within  the  varëäçrama
system,  but  those  outside  of  it  as  well.  Every  human  being  can  practice  nonviolence,
restraint from stealing, the giving up of lust, anger, and greed, and a charitable disposition
toward others.
PURPORT
The  qualities  of  nonviolence,  truthfulness,  honesty,  restraint  of  lust,  anger,  and
greed, and looking after the welfare of others are held in esteem in all human societies.
dvitéyaà präpyänupürvyäj janmopanayanaà dvijaù
vasan guru-kule dänto brahmädhéyéta cähütaù
The twice-born member of the varëäçrama society should undergo the purificatory
rituals, beginning with the garbhädhäna and culminating in the sacred thread initiation
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
336 Chapter 11
ceremony. He should then reside in the äçrama of the spiritual master, while practicing
self-control and studying the Vedic literature.
COMMENTARY
The Lord describes the qualities of the members of the four äçramas in the following
nine verses. Brähmaëas, kñatriyas, and vaiçyas are known as dvija, or twice-born. They
observe the system of saàskäras, or purificatory rites, beginning with the garbhädhäna
saàskära, and later on receive the Gäyatré mantra, which signifies their second birth
through spiritual initiation. Thereafter, when they are called by the äcärya, they go to
live in the gurukula, where they practice self-control and study the Vedas.
PURPORT
The  term  dvija,  or  “twice-born,”  here  indicates  the  three  superior  classes,  namely
brähmaëas, kñatriyas and vaiçyas. The lowest class of men, the çüdras, as well as those
who  are  outside  the  varëäçrama  society  do  not  observe  the  purificatory  rites  that  are
performed by the higher three classes. Because of this, their condition is full of ignorance
and  so  they  should  be  carefully  guided  so  as  not  to  become  disresptful  of  the  higher
classes of men. Those who observe the purificatory processes should give up whimisical
arguments and instead become submissive to the elevated devotees of the Lord.
mekhaläjina-daëòäkña- brahma-sütra-kamaëòalün
jaöilo ‘dhauta-dad-väso ‘rakta-péöhaù kuçän dadhat
A brahmacäréshould have matted hair, and he should wear a belt of kuça grass and
deerskin garments. He should carry a staff and a waterpot, and he should be decorated
with akña beads and a sacred thread. He should be inclined to austerity and thus never
accept an opulent sitting place. He should not take very good care of his teeth, nor should
he be concerned about his clothes.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of the Varëäçrama System
snäna-bhojana-homeñu japoccäre ca väg-yataù
na cchindyän nakha-romäëi kakñopastha-gatäny api
A brahmacäréshould remain silent while bathing, eating, performing fire sacrifices,
chanting  mantras,  and  passing  stool  and  urine.  He  should  not  cut  his  nails  and  hair,
including the armpit and pubic hair.
COMMENTARY
A brahmacäré should always be seen with a waistband, deerskin, kuça grass, beads,
and  a  sacred  thread.  He  should  not  be  concerned  about  the  whiteness  of  his  teeth  or
the condition of his clothes. He should neither wear red cloth nor sit on a red äçana. He
should remain silent while chanting mantras, and while passing stool or urine.
reto nävakirej jätu brahma-vrata-dharaù svayam
avakérëe ‘vagähyäpsu yatäsus tri-padäà japet
While observing the vow of celibate brahmacärélife, one should never pass semen.
If he passes semen involuntarily, the brahmacäréshould immediately bathe, control his
breath by the practice of präëäyäma, and chant the Gäyatré mantra.
agny-arkäcärya-go-vipra-guru-våddha-suräï çuciù
samähita upäséta sandhye dve yata-väg japan
With a purified mind and fixed attention, the brahmacäréshould worship the fire-
god, sun, äcärya, cows, brähmaëas, guru, elderly respectable persons, and demigods at
sunrise and sunset, remaining silent while quietly chanting the appropriate mantras.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
338 Chapter 11
COMMENTARY
The  brahmacäré  should  remain  silent  while  performing  his  morning  and  evening
worship, but such silence is not required when he performs his noontime rituals.
äcäryaà mäà vijänéyän navamanyeta karhicit
na martya-buddhyäsüyeta sarva-deva-mayo guru
One should know the äcärya as Myself and never disrespect him in any way. One
should not envy him, thinking him an ordinary man, for he is the representative of all
the demigods.
COMMENTARY
The  Supreme  Lord  said:  “You  should  know  the  spiritual  master  as  My  most  dear
servant.” For this reason, it has been stated: guruvaraà mukunda preñöhatvena smaret:
Remember  the  spiritual  master  as  the  most  beloved  devotee  of  Lord  Mukunda.  One
should never disregard the spiritual master by considering him to be an ordinary human
being.
PURPORT
When  the  Supreme  Lord  takes  the  position  of  an  instructor,  desiring  to  award
eternal benefit to the living entities, He becomes known as an äcärya. If one neglects
the  äcärya,  or  if  a  disciple  considers  himself  as  equal  to  his  spiritual  master  and  thus
displays envy and audacity towards him, then there is no possibility for him to become
successful in his vows. This is due to a lack of faith in the spiritual master. Therefore,
one  who  seriously  aspires  to  attain  the  ultimate  goal  of  life  should  properly  worship
the spiritual master, considering him as the supreme personality of servitor Godhead.
Instead of considering the äcärya as the object of one’s service, one should consider him
a staunch servant of Lord Viñëu.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of the Varëäçrama System
säyaà prätar upänéya bhaikñyaà tasmai nivedayet
yac cänyad apy anujïätam upayuïjéta saàyataù
Every morning and evening, the brahmacäréshould bring whatever food and other
things  he  has  received  by  begging  door  to  door  and  offer  them  to  his  spiritual  master.
Thereafter, with a controlled mind, he should accept whatever is allotted to him by his
spiritual master.
COMMENTARY
Whatever a brahmacäré collects by begging, or receives in charity, should be offered
to the spiritual master. He should only eat, or utilize any object, after being permitted
by the spiritual master.
PURPORT
The purpoe of human life is to revive one’s forgotten relationship with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. This mission is accomplished under the direction of the bona
fide spiritual master. From childhood, a boy is trained to become very submissive to his
spiritual master and very austere in his lifestyle. Whatever a student has collected, he
must offer to the spiritual master and then only accept what is allotted to him by his
guru. One who hopes to advance in spiritual life should not want to acquire things for
his personal enjoyment. Such training is imparted by the spiritual master to his disciples
and when he sees that his student has advanced, he engages him directly in the service
of the Supreme Lord.
çuçrüñamäëa äcäryaà sadopäséta néca-vat
yäna-çayyäsana-sthänair näti-düre kåtäïjaliù
One should engage as the humble servant of the äcärya. When the spiritual master
goes for a walk, the student should submissively follow him. When the spiritual master
rests, the disciple should also rest lying down nearby, always ready to render any required
service. When the spiritual master sits down, the disciple should stand nearby with folded
hands, ready to execute his order.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
340 Chapter 11
COMMENTARY
When the spiritual master walks, a disciple should follow him like a menial servant.
When the spiritual master sleeps, a disciple should sleep nearby, and when he sits on his
äçana, a disciple should stand in front of him with folded hands, awaiting his order.
PURPORT
The only means for advancing in spiritual life is to always remain faithfully devoted
to the spiritual master. In all respects, one’s relationship with the spiritual master should
be that of a master and servant. In this regard, one should contemplate this verse from
the Padma Puräëa, Uttara-khaëòa:
arcayitvä tu govindaà tadéyän närcayet tu yaù
na sa bhägavato jïeyaù kevalaà dämbhikaù småtaù
One who performs worship of Lord Govinda but fails to worship His devotees
should be understood to be not a devotee of the Lord, but simply a victim of false
pride.
evaà-våtto guru-kule vased bhoga-vivarjitaù
vidyä samäpyate yävad bibhrad vratam akhaëòitam
Until  his  education  is  completed,  a  brahmacäré  should  remain  at  the  guru-kula,
faithfully  engaging  in  the  service  of  the  spiritual  master  while  maintaining  his  vow  of
celibacy.
PURPORT
While living at the gurukula, a brahmacäré should observe strict celibacy. He should
not  be  driven  by  urges  for  sense  gratification,  and  he  should  not  think  of  himself  as
the  enjoyer  of  the  fruits  of  his  karma.  Only  in  this  way  can  one  master  the  spiritual
knowledge that is imparted to him by the spiritual master.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of the Varëäçrama System
yady asau chandasäà lokam ärokñyan brahma-viñöapam
gurave vinyased dehaà svädhyäyärthaà båhad-vrataù
If a brahmacäréwishes to transfer himself to Maharloka, and from there to Brahmaloka,
he  should  very  thoroughly  study  the  Vedas  under  the  direction  of  the  spiritual  master
while strictly observing the vow of celibacy.
COMMENTARY
After  describing  the  characteristics  of  a  brahmacäré  who  may  later  on  enter  the
gåhastha äçrama, the Lord now explains the special characteristics of a strict, lifelong
brahmacäré in six verses. If a brahmacäré desires to go to Brahmaloka, he should observe
strict lifelong celibacy and fully dedicate himself to his spiritual master while engaging
in advanced study of the Vedas.
PURPORT
Anyone  who  desires  to  attain  perfection  in  life  must  engage  his  body,  mind,  and
words in the service of the spiritual master, without any separate interest.
agnau guräv ätmani ca sarva-bhüteñu mäà param
apåthag-dhér upaséta brahma-varcasvy akalmañaù
Being enlightened with Vedic knowledge as a result of service to the spiritual master,
and  being  freed  from  all  sins  and  the  vision  of  duality,  one  should  worship  Me  as  the
Supersoul  as  I  appear  within  fire,  the  spiritual  master,  one’s  own  self,  and  all  living
entities.
COMMENTARY
The phrase bramavarcca means “the enlightenment one attains by carefully studying
the Vedic literature.”
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
342 Chapter 11
PURPORT
If a person actually becomes enlightened as a result of studying the Vedas, he will
never again willfully indulge in sinful activities. In the state of self-realization, one does
not proudly consider himself to be the enjoyer of the perishable material objects. Rather,
he thinks himself to be an eternal servant of the Supreme Lord, and thus he remains
engaged in the devotional service of the Lord without deviation.
stréëäà nirékñaëa-sparça-saàläpa-kñvelanädikam
präëino mithuné-bhütän agåhastho ‘gratas tyajet
Except householders, members of the other spiritual orders—sannyäsés, vänaprasthas,
and brahmacärés—should never associate with women by glancing, touching, conversing,
joking, or playing. Neither should they associate with any living entity who is engaged in
sexual activities.
COMMENTARY
Brahmacärés,  vänaprasthas,  and  sannyäsés  should  never  even  see  birds  or  insects
engaged in sexual intercourse.
PURPORT
With  a  spirit  of  enjoyment,  if  the  brahmacäré  sees,  touches,  intimately  converses
with,  plays  with,  or  jokes  with  a  woman,  then  his  ruination  is  inevitable.  One  should
not  associate  with  women,  talk  about  women,  or  even  associate  or  talk  about  those
who  are  attached  to  women.  This  principle  is  particularly  applicable  to  brahmacärés,
vänaprasthas,  and  sannyäsés.  If  a  householder  does  not  control  his  senses  and  follow
the regulative principles, he is known as gåha-vrata, or an overly-attached householder.
That is the danger of household life, where there are many opportunities to engage in
unrestricted sense gratification. A sannyäsé, brahmacäré, or vänaprastha should strictly
avoid  everything  related  to  sex  and  should  never  even  gaze  at  an  animal  engaged  in
sexual affairs.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of the Varëäçrama System
TEXTS 34-35
çaucam äcamanaà snänaà sandhyopästir mamärcanam
tértha-sevä japo ‘spåçyä-bhakñyäsambhäñya-varjanam
sarväçrama-prayukto ‘yaà niyamaù kula-nandana
mad-bhävaù sarva-bhüteñu mano-väk-käya-saàyamaù
Cleanliness, performing äcamana, bathing, performing the religious duties prescribed
for the morning, noon, and evening, worshiping Me, going to holy places of pilgrimage,
avoiding  those  things  that  are  forbidden,  and  cultivating  the  understanding  that  I  am
situated as the Supersoul within all living entities—these practices should be observed by
everyone with body, mind, and speech.
evaà båhad-vrata-dharo brähmaëo ‘gnir iva jvalan
mad-bhaktas tévra-tapasä dagdha-karmäçayo ‘malaù
A  brähmaëa  who  strictly  observes  the  vow  of  celibacy  becomes  as  effulgent  and
powerful as fire. By the strength of his severe austerities, he burns to ashes the propensity
to  perform  material  activities.  Becoming  freed  from  all  material  desires,  he  becomes
situated in pure devotional service.
COMMENTARY
This verse explains how one who observes strict celibacy becomes free from material
desires.
PURPORT
As he makes advancement in spiritual life, a devotee of the Lord gradually becomes
free  from  material  desires,  and  thus  naturally  becomes  austere  and  disinterested  in
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
344 Chapter 11
mundane enjoyment. As a devotee’s propensity for serving Kåñëa progressively increases,
his desire for enjoying or rejecting the fruits of karma is destroyed. Thus the moon rays
of the inclination for the Lord’s service illuminate the sky of the devotee’s heart.
athänantaram ävekñyan yathä-jijïäsitägamaù
gurave dakñiëäà dattvä snäyäd gurv-anumoditaù
A brahmacäréwho desires to enter the gåhastha äçrama after completing his Vedic
education  should  offer  dakñiëä  to  his  spiritual  master,  take  permission  from  him,  and
then return home after completing the abhyaì gasnäna, or sacred bath.
COMMENTARY
The Lord herein explains how a brahmacäré who wants to become a gåhastha should
return home. After duly completing his study of the Vedas at the gurukula, a brahmacäré
who  wants  to  enter  householder  life  should  return  home  after  offering  remuneration
to his spiritual master and taking his permission, and then performing the prescribed
ritualistic bath.
PURPORT
This  verse  describes  the  procedure  for  one  who  desires  to  return  home  and  enter
the  household  order  of  life  after  finishing  his  education  at  the  guru-kula.  One  who
has not perfectly assimilated the instructions of the spiritual master is attracted to the
household order of life, which is to be accepted according to the regulations prescribed
by  the scriptures. If one is not careful to observe the prescribed rules and regulations
while in household life, he certainly becomes fallen.
gåhaà vanaà vopaviçet pravrajed vä dvijottamaù
äçramäd äçramaà gacchen nänyathämat-paraç caret
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of the Varëäçrama System
If a brahmacäåéwants to fulfill his material desires, he should accept the gåhastha
äçrama.  If  a  brähmaëa’s  only  desire  is  to  advance  on  the  path  of  spiritual  realization,
he  should  accept  either  the  vänaprastha äçrama  or  sannyäsa äçrama.  One  who  is  not
surrendered to Me should move progressively from one äçrama to another, however, and
not act otherwise.
COMMENTARY
According to one’s level of advancement, one should situate himself in one of the
four  äçramas.  Generally,  one  is  advised  to  advance  from  one  äçrama  to  another—
from the brahmacarya äçrama to the gåhastha äçrama, then the vänaprastha äçrama,
and  finally  the  sannyäsa  äçrama.  In  this  verse  it  is  indicated  that  those  who  are  not
surrendered devotees of the Lord must rigidly observe the regulations governing one’s
authorized  social  status.  Here,  however,  it  is  recommended  that  a  purified  brähmaëa
take to the renounced order of life (sannyäsa). If, however, one performs illicit activities
on the strength of being transcendental to Vedic social divisions, one is revealed to be a
materialistic neophyte and not an advanced devotee of the Lord.
gåhärthé sadåçéà bhäryäm udvahed ajugupsitäm
yavéyaséà tu vayasä yaà sa-varëäm anu kramät
One who desires to enter the gåhastha äçrama should marry a girl of his own varëa,
who is beyond reproach, and who is younger in age. Thereafter, if one wants more wives,
they should be accepted from one of the lower varëas.
COMMENTARY
One who desires to marry should select a girl from his own caste. A brähmaëa can
marry girls of all the four varëas, a kñatriya can marry girls from three varëas, a vaiçya
can marry girls from two varëas, and a çüdra can only marry a girl of his varëa. This is
the verdict of the revealed scriptures.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
346 Chapter 11
ijyädhyayana-dänäni sarveñäà ca dvi-janmanäm
pratigraho ‘dhyäpanaà ca brähmaëasyaiva yäjanam
Those  who  belong  to  the  three  twice-born  social  orders  should  perform  sacrifice,
study the Vedas, and give charity. However, only brähmaëas can accept charity, teach the
Vedas, and perform sacrifices on behalf of others.
COMMENTARY
Every member of the three higher varëas should worship the Supreme Lord, study
the  Vedas,  and  give  charity.  However,  acceptance  of  charity,  teaching  the  Vedas,  and
acting as a priest on another’s behalf can be done only by brähmaëas.
PURPORT
Those who are twice-born, who have undergone the purificatory procedures, must
worship  the  Supreme  Lord,  study  the  Vedic  literature,  and  give  charity.  Among  the
twice-born, only the brähmaëas are eligible to accept charity, conduct Vedic sacrifices
on behalf of others, and teach the Vedic literature. Without the guidance of qualified
brähmaëas, the kñatriyas and vaiçyas will not be able to properly carry out their duties,
nor  will  they  understand  the  Vedic  literature,  properly  perform  sacrifices,  or  give  in
charity to deserving persons. All of these activities require the guidance of those who are
in perfect knowledge of the truth. When society works under the direction of qualified
brähmaëas, peace and prosperity prevail, and not otherwise.
pratigrahaà manyamänas tapas-tejo-yaço-nudam
anyäbhyäm eva jéveta çilair vä doña-dåk tayoù
A brähmaëa who considers that accepting charity from others will destroy his austerity,
spiritual prowess, and fame, should maintain himself by teaching Vedic knowledge and
engaging as a sacrificial priest. If he considers these two activities to also be faulty, then
he should maintain himself by collecting grains from the agricultural fields.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of the Varëäçrama System
COMMENTARY
If a brähmaëa finds fault in the occupations of a teacher of Vedic knowledge and
sacrificial  priest,  then  he  should  collect  the  grains  that  are  found  scattered  in  the
agricultural fields.
PURPORT
Brähmaëas who are reluctant to accept charity, thinking that such an act weakens
his  austerity,  destroys  his  spiritual  influence,  and  gives  him  a  bad  reputation,  should
simply depend upon the Lord’s mercy, and not make a great endeavor to earn wealth.
A  brähmaëa  should  simply  depend  upon  the  mercy  of  the  Lord,  and  not  endeavor
unnecessarily for his family maintenance. The Lord has promised that He will maintain
His devotee and one who is sincere does not doubt the words of the Lord.
brähmaëasya hi deho ‘yaà kñudra-kämäya neñyate
kåcchräya tapase ceha pretyänanta-sukhäya ca
The body of a brähmaëa is not meant for enjoying insignificant sense gratification.
Rather, it is meant for performing austerities in this life, so that a brähmaëa will enjoy
unlimited happiness after death.
COMMENTARY
The question may arise, “Why should a brähmaëa take so much trouble performing
austerities?”  The  answer  is  that  the  body  of  a  brähmaëa  is  not  meant  for  fulfilling
insignificant  material  desires—it  is  meant  for  performing  difficult  austerities  in  this
life, so that he will achieve unlimited happiness in the next life.
PURPORT
A  båähmaëa  who  has  realized  the  transcendental  Personality  of  Godhead  enjoys
boundless spiritual happiness and so does not take pleasure in the gratification of the
senses.  Such  a  devotee  does  not  undergo  severe  austerities  simply  for  the  purpose  of
deceiving himself. Those who consider that surrendering to the Supreme Lord involves
great  severe  austerity  think  in  that  way  because  they  are  addicted  to  selfish  acts  of
sense enjoyment. Being self-interested, they may ultimately engage in severe austerities
for the purpose of attaining liberation. Devotees of the Lord, however, on the strength
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
348 Chapter 11
of  their  engagement  in  devotional  service,  reject  the  pleasures  of  the  senses  as  being
insignificant. It is not the duty of a brähmaëa to become either a sense enjoyer or a dry
ascetic. His training is simply meant for him to understand that he is the eternal servant
of the Supreme Lord.
If a brähmaëa carefully contemplates the meaning of the following three verses, he
can surely come to the conclusion that human life is meant for engaging oneself in the
devotional service of the Lord, and not for pursuing insignificant sense gratification.
nähaà vande tava caraëayor dvandvam advandva-hetoù
kumbhépäkaà gurum api hare närakaà näpanetum
ramyä-rämä-mådu-tanu-latä nandane näpi rantuà
bhäve bhäve hådaya-bhavane bhävayeyaà bhavantam
O Lord Hari, it is not to be saved from the dualities of material existence or
the grim tribulations of the Kumbhépäka hell that I pray to Your lotus feet. Nor is
my purpose to enjoy the soft-skinned beautiful women who reside in the gardens
of heaven. I pray to Your lotus feet only so that I may remember You alone in the
core of my heart, birth after birth. (Mukunda-mälä-stotra 4)
nästhä dharme na vasu-nicaye naiva kämopabhoge
yad bhävyaà tad bhavatu bhagavan pürva-karmänurüpam
etat prärthyaà mama bahu-mataà janma-janmäntare ’pi
tvat-pädämbho-ruha-yuga-gatä niçcalä bhaktir astu
I  have  no  attraction  for  performing  religious  rituals  or  holding  any  earthly
kingdom. I do not care for sense enjoyments; let them appear and disappear in
accordance with my previous deeds. My only desire is to be fixed in devotional
service to the lotus feet of the Lord, even though I may continue to take birth
here life after life. (Mukunda-mälä-stotra 5)
na dhanaà na janaà na sundaréà kavitäà vä jagad-éça kämaye
mama janmani janmanéçvare bhavatäd bhaktir ahaituké tvayi
O Almighty Lord, I have no desire to accumulate wealth, nor to enjoy beautiful
women. Nor do I want any number of followers. What I want only is the causeless
mercy of Your devotional service in my life, birth after birth. (Çikñäñöaka 4)
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of the Varëäçrama System
çiloïcha-våttyä parituñöa-citto dharmaà mahäntaà virajaà juñäëaù
mayy arpitätmä gåha eva tiñöhan näti-prasaktaù samupaiti çäntim
A  brähmaëa  householder  should  remain  satisfied  while  maintaining  himself  by
collecting rejected grains found in the fields and marketplaces. Keeping himself free of
personal desire, he should practice religious principles while fixing his mind on Me. In
this way, a  brähmaëa can remain at home, gradually cultivating detachment, and thus
advance toward the ultimate goal of life.
COMMENTARY
The  word  unchavåtti  means  “to  collect  rejected  grains  that  have  been  left  in  the
marketplaces and agricultural fields.” The phrase dharmaà mahäntaà especially refers
to faithfully serving guests.
PURPORT
Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura has said that one should engage in the service of the
Supreme Lord, whether one is living at home or residing in the forest. The essence of all
the instructions of çästra is that it is the duty of all the members of the eight varëas and
äçramas to serve the Supreme Lord, while remaining indifferent to material enjoyment.
If one utilizes everything in the service of Lord Kåñëa, then regardless of his position
within the varëäçrama social system, he must be considered a liberated soul.
In  this  regard,  one  should  carefully  consider  the  verse  describing  yukta  vairägya,
beginning with anäsaktasya, and the verse describing phalgu vairägya, beginning with
präpaïcikataya. By understanding the purport of these two verses, one’s pure devotional
service will be awakened. Without being enlightened by the instructions of the bona fide
spiritual master, unrestricted material desires that are fulfilled by engagement in fruitive
activities, or on a higher platform, indulgence in mental speculation, will not allow one
to  favorably  cultivate  Kåñëa  consciousness.  Brähmaëas  who  are  attached  to  ritualistic
activities that are meant for enjoying material happiness, or who practice renunciation
in  the  hopes  of  merging  into  the  impersonal  Brahman,  invite  inauspiciousness  to  fall
upon themselves.
In this regard, one should carefully contemplate the purport of these two verses:
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
350 Chapter 11
yadåcchayä mat-kathädau jäta-çraddhas tu yaù pumän
na nirviëëo nätisakto bhakti-yogo ‘sya siddhidaù
Somehow or other, if one is attracted to talks about Me and has faith in the
instructions  I  have  set  forth  in  Bhagavad-gétä,  and  if  one  is  actually  detached
from  material  things  and  material  existence,  his  dormant  love  for  Me  will  be
awakened by devotional service. (Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.2.15)
ärädhito yadi haris tapasä tataù kià
narädhito yadi haris tapasä tataù kim
antar bahir yadi haris tapasä tataù kià
näntar bahir yadi haris tapasä tataù kim
If  one  is  worshiping  Lord  Hari,  what  is  the  use  of  performing  extraneous
penances? And if one is not worshiping Lord Hari, no such penances will save
one. If one can understand that Lord Hari is all-pervading, within and without,
what is the need of performing penances? And if one is not able to understand
that Hari is all-pervading, all his penances are useless. (Närada Païcarätra)
samuddharanti ye vipraà sédantaà mat-paräyaëam
tän uddhariñye na ciräd äpadbhyo naur ivärëavät
Just as a ship rescues a person who has fallen into the ocean and is drowning, I deliver
My devotee brähmaëa who may be afflicted with poverty, or who endeavors to deliver
others from this ocean of birth and death.
COMMENTARY
When a person gives up the service of the Lord to enjoy a life of sense gratificiation,
he is certainly to be considered fallen. Such a person can still benefit himself if he gives
some of his hard-earned wealth for the service of the Lord. Here the example is given
of a boat that rescues persons drowning in the ocean. Similarly, the Lord delivers those
who are drowning in the ocean of material existence if they render service in this way.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of the Varëäçrama System
PURPORT
If, by good fortune, one who has fallen into the ocean of material existence renders
service to the pure devotees of the Supreme Lord, who are freed from all material desires,
the  Lord  will  deliver  him,  out  of  His  causeless  mercy.  Simply  by  rendering  service  to
the spiritual master and other advanced devotees, one surely receives the mercy of the
Lord. It is a well-known fact that the Lord is more mercifully inclined toward those who
consider  themselves  devotees  of  His  devotees  than  those  who  claim  to  be  His  direct
devotees.
sarväù samuddhared raja piteva vyasanät prajäù
ätmänam ätmanä dhéro yathä gaja-patir gajän
Just as the king of elephants protects all the other elephants under his shelter and also
defends himself, so a king, just like a father, should afford his subjects full protection, and
also defend himself from all adversaries.
COMMENTARY
The duty of a king is described in this verse. Just like a father, a king should protect
his subjects from all kinds of danger.
evaà-vidho nara-patir vimänenärka-varcasä
vidhüyehäçubhaà kåtsnam indreëa saha modate
A king who protects himself and his citizens by removing all sinful activities from
his kingdom will certainly enjoy with Indra in celestial airplanes that are as brilliant as
the sun.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
352 Chapter 11
sédan vipro vaëig-våttyä paëyair eväpadaà taret
khaògena väpadäkränto na çva-våttyä kathaïcana
If a brähmaëa is unable to maintain himself by performing his prescribed duties, he
may accept the occupation of a vaiçya and thus save himself from a life of poverty. If he
still faces difficulty as a vaiçya, he can adopt the occupation of kñatriya, but he should
never become like a dog by accepting an ordinary man as his master.
COMMENTARY
Beginning with this verse, the Lord describes what should be done if one experiences
difficulty  maintaining  himself  by  performing  the  duties  of  his  varëa.  A  brähmaëa
may  earn  his  livelihood  by  doing  business,  but  he  should  not  sell  wine  or  salt.  If  in
danger, a brähmaëa may also adopt the profession of a kñatriya. A brähmaëa is herein
recommended to adopt the profession of a merchant rather than that of a kñatriya. The
idea is that selling commodities as a vaiçya is better than killing enemies as a kñatriya,
but it is emphasized that a brähmaëa should never earn his livelihood by serving low-
class people. This is the opinion of Lord Kåñëa.
vaiçya-våttyä tu räjanyo jéven mågayayäpadi
cared vä vipra-rüpeëa na çva-våttyä kathaïcana
A  kñatriya  who  cannot  maintain  himself  by  his  normal  occupation  may  act  as  a
vaiçya,  maintain  himself  by  hunting,  or  teach  the  Vedas  to  others,  but  he  must  never
under any circumstances undertake the proffesion of a çüdra.
COMMENTARY
If a kñatriya is unable to maintain himself by his own profession, he may adopt the
profession of a brähmaëa by teaching Vedic knowledge.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of the Varëäçrama System
çüdra-våttià bhajed vaiçyaù çüdraù käru-kaöa-kriyäm
kåcchrän mukto na garhyeëa våttià lipseta karmaëä
A vaiçya who cannot maintain himself may adopt the occupation of a çüdra, and a
çüdra who cannot find a master can engage in simple work, like making baskets and mats
out of straw. However, all members of society who have adopted inferior occupations due
to emergency situations must give them up once the difficulties have passed.
COMMENTARY
When the emergency situation that caused one to accept an inferior occupation has
passed,  one  must  return  to  his  normal  occupational  duties.  One  must  never  aspire  to
earn wealth by performing abominable activities.
vedädhyäya-svadhä-svähä-baly-annädyair yathodayam
devarñi-pitå-bhütäni mad-rüpäëy anv-ahaà yajet
According to their means, householders should daily worship the sages by studying
the Vedas, the forefathers by offering oblations, the demigods by performing sacrifices, the
living entities in general by offering them food, and human beings by offering them water
and grains. They should perform the five kinds of daily sacrifices while understanding the
demigods, sages, forefathers, and indeed all types of living entities to be representations
of My various potencies.
COMMENTARY
After  explaining  what  one  should  do  in  times  of  difficulty,  the  Lord  once  again
describes the duties of a householder. A householder should repay his debt to the sages
by studying the Vedas, his debt to the forefathers by offering them oblations, his debt to
the demigods by performing sacrifices, his debt to living entities in general by offering
them food, and his debt to the human beings by offering them food and water. In this
way, a householder should repay the five kinds of debt.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
354 Chapter 11
yadåcchayopapannena çuklenopärjitena vä
dhanenäpéòayan bhåtyän nyäyenaiväharet kratün
A householder should maintain his dependents by the wealth that has come to him of
its own accord, as well as the wealth that he has earned by honest means. He should also
utilize his wealth to perform sacrifices and other religious functions.
COMMENTARY
One  should  earn  wealth  by  engaging  in  an  honest  profession  and  one  should  not
endeavor too strenuously, knowing that the Lord will supply his necessities of life. One
should  perform  religious  activities,  such  as  sacrifices,  without  committing  violence  to
other living entities.
kuöumbeñu na sajjeta na pramädyet kuöumby api
vipaçcin naçvaraà paçyed adåñöam api dåñöa-vat
Although a householder may have many dependents, he should not become attached
to them, thinking that they have an intrinsic relation with him, nor should he become
proud,  considering  himself  to  be  some  kind  of  lord.  An  intelligent  householder  should
understand that all kinds of material happiness, even that which is available in heaven, is
just like the temporary material happiness that he has already experienced.
COMMENTARY
In the next four verses, Lord Kåñëa describes the duties of a detached householder.
Even though a householder acts like a little lord, surrounded by his dependents, he should
not forget the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord. He should know that his dependent family
members  are  temporary,  as  are  the  unseen  heavenly  pleasures  and  visible  pleasures  of
this  world.  The  purport  is  that  a  householder  should  cultivate  a  mood  of  detachment
so  that  he  can  guide  his  family  members  and  other  dependents  back  home,  back  to
Godhead, for an eternal life of bliss and knowledge.
PURPORT
An  intelligent  person  should  not  invite  aversion  to  the  Supreme  Lord  under  the
pretext that it is his primary duty to maintain his dependent family members by hook or
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of the Varëäçrama System
by crook. Just as the things of this world are temporary manifestations, so is existence in
the heavenly planets. According to one’s qualities and activities, one is placed within a
particular varëa or äçrama. If there is any difficulty in the execution of one’s prescribed
profession, one may take up the profession of a lower varëa. One should live in society
and  accept  material  enjoyment  in  such  a  way  that  will  not  cause  a  disturbance.  One
should gradually give up attachment for the material enjoyment that is available in this
life and well as the next.
putra-däräpta-bandhünäà saìgamaù päntha-saìgamaù
anu-dehaà viyanty ete svapno nidränugo yathä
One’s society of children, wife, relatives, and friends can be compared to a meeting
of travelers at an inn. Upon changing his body, one is separated from all such friends and
relatives, just as when one wakes up from a dream, all that was seen is lost.
COMMENTARY
The association of wife, children, relatives, and friends, should be considered to be
like the meeting of travelers at a resting place. One should cultivate a mood of detachment
from  everything  material  by  carefully  considering  how  nothing  is  permanent  in  this
world. All of one’s relatives will vanish one day, however affectionate they may be. All
objects of this world are temporary, as are the objects one sees in a dream.
PURPORT
The  relationships  one  has  with  his  wife,  children,  kinsmen,  and  friends  are
temporary, just like the experiences of a dream. While dreaming, one comes in contact
with various objects and people, but when he wakes up, all of these vanish. As long as
one maintains attachment for such perishable objects, one cannot become steady on the
transcendental platform of devotional service, and thus cannot relish the actual flavor
of  eternal  happiness.  One  who  remains  attached  to  the  bodily  concept  of  family  and
friends cannot possibly give up the false egoism of “I” and “mine.”
Unless  a  householder  worships  child  Kåñëa,  his  attachment  for  his  children  will
remain  strong.  As  long  as  the  Lord’s  pastimes  in  mädhurya  rasa  do  not  become  the
subject  of  one’s  meditation,  one  will  continue  to  think  of  his  wife  as  the  reservoir  of
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
356 Chapter 11
all pleasure. Unless one becomes a pure devotee of the Lord, accepting Lord Kåñëa as
one’s  only  friend,  just  like  Çrédäma,  one  will  not  be  able  to  give  up  the  hankering  for
temporary  and  superficial  material  relationships.  Until  one’s  propensity  for  rendering
devotional  service  to  Lord  Kåñëa  is  awakened,  one  will  continue  to  foolishly  demand
service from others. One who is actually intelligent should understand that there can
be no satisfaction for the self on any planet within the material world. Therefore, like
a traveler who has become very tired while traveling, one should go back home, back to
Godhead. Eternal peace is the condition of the faithful servant of Lord Çré Kåñëa.
itthaà parimåçan mukto gåheñv atithi-vad vasan
na gåhair anubadhyeta nirmamo nirahaìkåtaù
A  detached  householder,  after  deeply  considering  his  situation,  should  give  up  all
pride and attachment and remain at home just like a guest. By doing so, he will never
become entangled by domestic affairs.
COMMENTARY
The word mukta means “detached.”
PURPORT
While considering how everything in this world is a temporary manifestation, one
should continue to perform his occupational duties, maintain his body and the bodies
of his family members, and cultivate detachment by remaining at home like a guest. By
full engagement in the devotional service of the Lord, one should free himself from the
false egoistic conception of thinking, “I am the enjoyer and all that I possess is mine.”
Such a false conception can be counteracted by thinking, “I belong to Kåñëa and Kåñëa
belongs to me.” To free oneself from attachment for one’s body, friends, and so on, one
should engage in the service of Lord Hari with firm determination, whether one lives
at home or resides in the forest. If one remains absorbed in thinking, “I belong to this
varëa,” “I belong to this äçrama,” “I am a man,” or “I am a woman,” and so on, one will
remain a gåha-våata, a person whose life is centered around his family. Without realizing
the purport of these two verses, one will either remain attached to family life, or become
attached to a false concept of renunciation.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of the Varëäçrama System
anäsaktasya viñayän yathärham upayuïjataù
nirbandhaù kåñëa-sambandhe yuktaà vairägyam ucyate
präpaïcikatayä buddhyä hari-sambandhi-vastunaù
mumukñubhiù parityägo vairägyaà phalgu kathyate
When one is not attached to anything, but at the same time accepts everything
in relation to Kåñëa, one is rightly situated above possessiveness. On the other
hand, one who rejects everything without knowledge of its relationship to Kåñëa
is not as complete in his renunciation. (Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.2.255-256)
When one cultivates Kåñëa consciousness favorably, without the coverings of karma
and jïäna, only then will he transcend his designated position within the varëäçrama
system.
karmabhir gåha-medhéyair iñövä mäm eva bhaktimän
tiñöhed vanaà vopaviçet prajävän vä parivrajet
A householder devotee who faithfully worships Me by the performance of his duties
can reside at home or at a holy place of pilgrimage. If he has a grown-up son and has given
up all desires for material enjoyment, he can take sannyäsa.
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Lord said, “A householder who is devoted to Me should perform all of
his activities for My satisfaction. While doing so, he can either live at home, go to the
forest, or accept the renounced order of life, sannyäsa.”
PURPORT
The result of an attached householder’s worship of the Lord is the attainment of pure
devotional  service.  One  should  not  remain  unnecessarily  entangled  in  family  affairs,
whether one lives at home, resides in the forest, or travels to holy places of pilgrimage.
Remaining situated in a particular varëa or äçrama does not constitute a hindrance to
becoming an advanced devotee of the Supreme Lord. The conclusion is that everyone
should engage in the service of the Lord in all respects.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
358 Chapter 11
yas tv äsakta-matir gehe putra-vittaiñaëäturaù
straiëaù kåpaëa-dhér müòho mamäham iti badhyate
However,  a  miserly  householder  who  has  strong  desires  to  enjoy  his  money,  lusty
desires with his wife, and the association of his children, and thus thinks, “All of these
are mine. I am the master of all I survey,” is in the densest darkness of ignorance.
COMMENTARY
This  and  the  next  two  verses  describe  the  fault  of  being  too  attached  to  one’s
household.
PURPORT
One  who  does  not  worship  Lord  Hari  while  giving  up  material  attachment  is
certainly  committing  an  offense  against  the  holy  name  of  the  Lord  by  maintaining
material attachment in terms of “I” and “mine.” Even though such a person may dress
like a devotee, he will not be liberated from his conditional state of material existence.
aho me pitarau våddhau bhäryä bälätmajätmajäù
anäthä mäm åte dénäù kathaà jévanti duùkhitäù
“Alas! How will my elderly parents continue to live? Without my protection, my poor
wife with her small children will suffer terribly! How can my poor family live without
me?”
COMMENTARY
One may think, “How can I leave home to advance in Kåñëa consciousness when I
have my wife and my one-month-old son? Alas! How can I leave my sons and daughters,
who are fully dependent upon me? How will they prosper—they are too young?” In this
way, an attached person remains full of anxiety.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Description of the Varëäçrama System
evaà gåhäçayäkñipta-hådayo müòha-dhér ayam
atåptas tän anudhyäyan måto ‘ndhaà viçate tamaù
Thus, as a result of his foolish mentality, a householder whose heart is overwhelmed
by family attachment remains in anxiety. While constantly meditating on his family, he
dies and enters the darkness of ignorance.
PURPORT
Those who engage their senses in sense gratification, instead of engaging them in
the service of Lord Kåñëa, think that without them, their old parents and their wives
and children will suffer, or that they will be criticized for not taking proper care of their
dependents.  In  this  way,  the  attached  householders  spend  their  days  in  anxiety.  As  a
result of their primitive mentality, after death, they will certainly be degraded to a lower
species of life.
Thus ends the translation of the eleventh chapter of the Uddhava-géta, entitled “Lord
Kåñëa’s Description of the Varëäçrama System” with the commentaries of Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté  Öhäkura  and  the  chapter  summary  and  purports  of  Çréla  Bhaktisiddhänta
Sarasvaté Öhäkura.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 12
desCrIPtIon of varëäÇrama-dharma
CHAPTER SUMMARY
In  this  chapter,  Lord  Çré  Kåñëa  explains  to  Uddhava  the  duties  and  practices  of
those in the vänaprastha and sannyäsa äçramas.
One  who  accepted  the  vänaprastha  äçrama  should  leave  his  wife  at  home  in  the
care of his grown-up sons, or else take her with him to reside in the forest. He should
then subsist upon whatever fruit and roots that are available in the forest, or sometimes
cooking  grains  when  they  are  freely  available.  He  should  wear  clothing  made  of  tree
bark, grass, and deerskin. While residing in the forest, he should not cut his hair, nails,
or beard. He should bathe three times a day and sleep on the ground. During the heat
of the summer, he should sit under the blazing sun, after lighting fires on all four sides.
During  the  monsoon,  he  should  let  the  rain  soak  him,  and  in  the  winter,  he  should
stand in cold water up to the neck. One in the vänaprastha äçrama should not brush
his teeth, keep left-over food, or performing any sacrifices that involve killing animals.
If a vänaprastha faithfully follows these principles, he can attain the Tapoloka planet
after death.
The  fourth  quarter  of  one’s  life  should  be  spent  in  the  renounced  order  of  life,
sannyäsa.  When  one  realizes  the  ultimate  futility  of  material  existence,  even  in  the
endeavor  to  reach  the  heavenly  planets,  he  should  accept  sannyäsa  as  an  expression
of  his  renunciation.  At  the  time  of  accepting  the  renounced  order  of  life,  one  should
worship the Supreme Lord, give everything in his possession in charity, and fix his mind
on  the  Lord  with  determination.  For  a  sannyäsé,  intimate  association  with  women  is
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
362 Chapter 12
more abominable than drinking poison. A sannyäsé should only wear a loin cloth, and
carry nothing more than his staff and water pot. He should live a life of complete non-
violence and he should carefully control his mind, body, and speech. While remaining
detached from any comfortable material situation, he should be fixed in self-realization
while  traveling  alone  to  holy  places  of  pilgrimage,  as  well  as  mountains,  rivers,  and
forests, while constantly remembering the Supreme Lord.
A sannyäsé should fearlessly reside in a secluded place. He should maintain himself
by begging from seven houses of those who are not fallen, selected at random. Whatever
he obtains he should offer to the Supreme Lord and accept the remnants as prasädam.
He should always remember that desires for sense gratification are the causes of bondage,
whereas  the  utilization  of  everything  in  the  service  of  the  Lord  is  liberation.  When
a  person  who  has  failed  to  conquer  his  six  enemies,  headed  by  lust,  and  who  has  no
knowledge  or  renunciation,  accepts  the  renounced  order  of  life  simply  for  the  sake  of
maintaining himself, the thing he will achieve is the killing of his own self.
A  paramahaàsa  is  not  governed  by  the  rules  and  regulations  prescribed  in  the
scriptures. He is a topmost devotee of the Lord who is fully detached from the objects of
the senses, and doesn’t even desire liberation from material existence. Although he is the
foremost learned scholar, he is devoid of pride and transcendental to praise and infamy.
Although  he  is  the  most  expert  of  all  persons,  he  wanders  about  like  a  madman,  and
although he is greatly learned, he speaks like one possessed by a ghost. Although he is a
master of the Vedas, he seems to act irresponsibly. He tolerates the harsh words of others
and never tries to retaliate such insults. He never creates enmity with others, and he is
never enticed into a useless argument. He sees how the Supreme Lord is situated in all
living entities, and how all living entities are situated in the Supreme Lord. He maintains
himself with whatever food, clothing, and shelter are obtained of their own accord. As
a result, he peacefully performs his worship of the Lord, without any anxiety. Although
he  may  sometimes  endeavor to get some food, just to keep  body and soul together, he
is never overjoyed when he receives something palatable, nor does he become dejected
when  he  fails  to  receive  anything.  He  is  on  the  same  platform  as  the  Supreme  Lord,
who  is  not  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Vedic  injunctions,  but  by  His  own  free  will,
performs pastimes for the welfare of all. Because such a paramahaàsa has transcended
the dualities of material existence, as the fruit of his transcendental knowledge of the
Supreme Lord, after quitting his material body, he attains the liberation known as särñöi,
whereby he becomes equal in opulence with the Lord.
A person who desires his own self-interest should take shelter of a bona fide spiritual
master and faithfully serve him, considering him to be non-different from the Supreme
Lord. The primary duty of a brahmäcäré is to serve his spiritual master. The principal
duties of a gåhastha are to maintain the other classes of men and perform sacrifices. A
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Description of Varëäçrama-dharma
vänaprastha must live a life of austerities, and a sannyäsé must carefully control his mind
and  senses.  Celibacy,  austerity,  cleanliness,  remaining  satisfied,  exhibiting  friendship
toward  all  living  beings,  and  worship  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  are  the
duties to be performed by every human being. By performing one’s occupational duties
under the direction of the Supreme Lord, one develops devotion for Him. One should
always be cognizant of the Lord because He resides within the bodies of all creatures as
the Supersoul.
Those  who  follow  the  karma-käëòa  sections  of  the  Vedas  ordinarily  attain  the
planets of the forefathers, but if they become devotees of the Supreme Lord, they can
rise to the platform of liberation.
çré-bhagavän uväca
vanaà vivikñuù putreñu bhäryäà nyasya sahaiva vä
vana eva vasec chäntas tåtéyaà bhägam äyuñaù
The  Supreme  Lord  said:  One  who  desires  to  adopt  the  third  order  of  life,  the
vänaprastha äçrama, should leave his wife in the care of his mature sons, or else take her
with him to peacefully reside in the forest.
COMMENTARY
This  twelfth  chapter  describes  the  duties  of  the  vänaprastha  and  sannyäsé,  the
devotees’ position of not being confined to the principles of äçrama, and discussion of
the ultimate goal of life.
The third portion of one’s life, beginning at the age of fifty, and continuing up to
the  age  of  seventy-five,  should  be  spent  in  the  vänaprastha  äçrama.  Thereafter,  one
should take sannyäsa.
PURPORT
There are four spiritual orders in human society, of which vänaprastha is the third.
To accept the vänaprastha äçrama, a householder should either leave his wife in the care
of his grown up sons, or take her with him and enter the forest. If one hopes to live for
one hundred years, he can take vänaprastha at the age of fifty, and sannyäsa at the age
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
364 Chapter 12
of seventy-five. At present, however, very few people live to a hundred and so one should
renounce materialistic life earlier
kanda-müla-phalair vanyair medhyair våttià prakalpayet
vaséta valkalaà väsas tåëa-parëäjinäni vä
In  the  forest,  a  vänaprastha  should  maintain  himself  by  eating  pure  fruit,  roots,
and bulbs that grow in the forest. He should dress himself in tree bark, leaves, grass, or
deerskin.
COMMENTARY
The word vaséta means “to dress oneself.”
PURPORT
It is recommended that a member of the vänaprastha äçrama should subsist upon
the  fruit  and  roots  that  are  available  in  the  forest,  and  he  should  wear  garments  of
deerskin, tree bark, and so on. In the fourteenth verse of the sixth chapter of the Manu
Saàhéta, it is stated:
varjayen madhu mäàsaà ca bhaumäni kavakäni ca
bhüståëaà çigrukaà caiva çleçmätakaphaläni ca
One  should  not  partake  of  honey-based  liquors,  animal  flesh,  fungus,
mushrooms, horseradish or any hallucinogenic or intoxicating herbs, even those
taken as so-called medicine.
keça-roma-nakha-çmaçru-maläni bibhåyäd dataù
na dhäved apsu majjeta tri kälaà sthaëòile-çayaù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Description of Varëäçrama-dharma
A vänaprastha should not groom his hair or beard, manicure his nails, cleanse his
teeth, or pass stool or urine at irregular times. He should be satisfied to bathe three times
a day, and he should sleep on the  bare ground.
PURPORT
A vänaprastha is prohibited to shave or brush his teeth because such activities would
draw his attention to the material body. He should bathe three times a day and sleep on
the ground.
gréñme tapyeta païcägnén varñäsv äsära-ñäò jale
äkaëtha-magnaù çiçira evaà våttas tapaç caret
While engaged in his life as a vänaprastha, one should execute penance during the
hottest  days  of  summer  by  keeping  fires  on  four  sides  and  the  blazing  sun  overhead.
During the rainy season, one should remain outside, subjecting himself to torrents of rain,
and in the freezing winter, one should remain submerged in water up to his neck.
PURPORT
The  followers  of  karma-käëòa  should  practice  the  penance  of  tolerating  the  five
kinds of heat during the summer. In the rainy season, they should remain outside, even
when there are torrents of rain. In the winter, they should remain submerged in water
up to the neck. A devotee of the Lord, however, naturally develops Kåñëa consciousness
and need not subject himself to such radical penances. The Närada-païcarätra confirms
this:
ärädhito yadi haris tapasä tataù kià
närädhito yadi haris tapasä tataù kim
antar bahir yadi haris tapasä tataù kià
näntar bahir yadi haris tapasä tataù kim
If  one  is  worshiping  the  Lord  properly,  what  is  the  use  of  severe  penance?
And if one is not properly worshiping the Lord, what is the use of severe penance?
If Çré Kåñëa is realized within and without everything that exists, what is the use
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
366 Chapter 12
of severe penance? And if Çré Kåñëa is not seen within and without everything,
then what is the use of severe penance?
agni-pakvaà samaçnéyät käla-pakvam athäpi vä
ulükhaläçma-kuööo vä dantolükhala eva vä
One  can  eat  cooked  food,  such  as  grains,  or  eat  fruit  that  has  been  ripened  in  the
course of time. One can grind grains with a stone mortar and pestle, or one can simply
grind the grains with his teeth.
COMMENTARY
As a concession, one can grind food grains with a stone and mortar. Otherwise, one
can simply grind his food with his teeth.
svayaà saïcinuyät sarvam ätmano våtti-käraëam
deça-käla-baläbhijïo nädadétänyadähåtam
The vänaprastha should go out and collect only as much as he requires for his bodily
maintenance. He should not save anything for future use.
COMMENTARY
A  vänaprastha  must  collect  things  for  his  maintenance  in  consideration  of  the
place, the time, and his capacity, and he must not save anything for the future use, thus
depending upon the mercy of the Lord. Of course, during an emergency, or if one is an
invalid, this rule need not be strictly followed.
PURPORT
Unless one is an invalid, one should not depend on others for one’s maintenance,
because this will make one indebted so that he will have to reborn to repaid whatever
he has received.  In the Manu Saàhétä (6.15) it is stated:
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Description of Varëäçrama-dharma
tyajedäçvayuje mäsi munyannaà pürvasaïcitam
jérëäni caiva väsäàsi çäkamülaphaläni ca
A sage should not have the habit of accumulating things for future use. He
should wear old clothes and maintain himself by eating spinach, roots, and fruit.
vanyaiç caru-puroòäçair nirvapet käla-coditän
na tu çrautena paçunä mäà yajeta vanäçramé
The  vänaprastha  should  perform  seasonal  sacrifices  by  offering  oblations  of  caru
and  sacrificial  cakes  prepared  from  rice  and  other  grains  that  are  found  in  the  forest.
However, he should never offer animal sacrifices to Me, even those that are mentioned
in the Vedas.
COMMENTARY
For example, in the month of November-December, one should worship the Supreme
Lord with an offering of newly-harvested grains.
PURPORT
The vänaprastha should perform sacrifice by utilizing whatever is available in the
forest  during  the  various  times  of  the  year.  However,  he  should  never  perform  any
sacrifice that involves killing animals.
agnihotraà ca darçaç ca paurëamäsaç ca pürva-vat
cäturmäsyäni ca muner ämnätäni ca naigamaiù
Expert knowers of the Vedas have prescribed for a vänaprastha the performance of
various sacrifices, such as the agnihotra, darça, and paurnamäsa, as well as the vow of
cäturmäsya.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
368 Chapter 12
COMMENTARY
The  vänaprastha  should  observe  whatever  practices  have  been  prescribed  by  the
expert knowers of the Vedas.
PURPORT
1.  Agnihotra. After marriage, a brähmaëa should perform fire sacrifice as prescribed
in the Vedas, especially during the spring. He should make a vow to use certain ingredients
for the performance of his sacrifices and he should stick to that principle for the rest of
his life. On moonless nights, one should personally perform fire sacrifice, especially with
oblations of barley. On other days, he may use other ingredients. After the completion
of one hundred such sacrifices, he should perform a special sacrifice for the satisfaction
of the sun-god in the morning, and another special sacrifice for the satisfaction of the
satisfaction  of  the  moon-god  in  the  evening.  After  commencing  the  performance  of
sacrifice during the first full moon day of the month, one should particularly perform
the darça and paurnamäsa sacrifices. One should perform three separate fire sacrifices
on the full moon day, and three on the new moon day. This procedure he should observe
for  the  remainder  of  his  life.  One  who  performs  the  agnihotra  sacrifice  in  this  way  is
assured of elevation to the heavenly planets, where he will enjoy great happiness. This
has been described in the literature known as Satapatha brähmaëa.
2.  Darça. Darça refers to the new moon day because on that day, the sun and the
moon  are  in  proximity.  In  the  Matsya  Puräëa,  it  is  said:  anyo  ’nyaà  candra  suryo  tu
darçanäd darça ucyate: On the day of darça, the sun and the moon see each other.
3.  Paurnamäsa. There are various sacrifices to be performed on the full moon day.
The  procedures  for  performing  these  sacrifices  are  mentioned  in  the  fourth  chapter
of  the  Manu-saàhéta.  In  the  book  called  Kätäyana-çrauta-sutra,  the  processes  for
performing these sacrifices are also described.
4.  Cäturmäsya.  Cäturmäsya  is  of  two  kinds—the  cäturmäsya  sacrifice  and  the
cäturmäsya vow. For a description of the procedures of this sacrifice, one should refer
to the Kätäyana-çrauta-sütra, chapter five. The procedures for observing this vow are
described in the Matsya Puräëa, Bhaviçya Puräëa, Skanda Puräëa, and Sanat-kumära
Saàhéta. One should also consult the Hari-bhakti-viläsa in this connection.
evaà cérëena tapasä munir dhamani-santataù
mäà tapo-mayam ärädhya åñi-lokäd upaiti mäm
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Description of Varëäçrama-dharma
When a vänaprastha performs severe austerities, only accepting the bare necessities
of life so that he becomes so emaciated that his bones and veins are clearly seen, he will
attain Maharloka and thereafter come to My supreme abode.
COMMENTARY
Maharloka is a planet of sages. After attaining the Maharloka, the vänaprastha who
had  not  completed  his  course  of  Kåñëa  consciousness  will  make  further  advancement
and thus qualify to go back home, back to Godhead.
PURPORT
After living a life of penance while observing all the required rules and regulations,
an ascetic reaches the planet of the sages. If he can understand the insignificant nature
of  that  achievement,  he  may  cultivate  his  taste  for  worshiping  the  Supreme  Lord.  In
the cultivation of unalloyed devotional service, there is no need for excessive penance.
Rather, there is an abundance of worship of the Lord.
yas tv etat kåcchrataç cérëaà tapo niùçreyasaà mahat
kämäyälpéyase yuïjyäd bäliçaù ko ‘paras tataù
Who could be more foolish than a person who utilizes his exalted but painful penance,
which can award ultimate liberation, for enjoying insignificant sense gratification?
COMMENTARY
In this verse, the Lord condemns those in the vänaprastha äçrama who are materially
ambitious.
PURPORT
It  is  not  the  duty  of  an  intelligent  person  to  try  and  subdue  his  material  desires
by  undergoing  severe  penance.  Rather,  he  should  engage  in  the  direct  service  of  the
Supreme Lord. Penance without devotional service is the act of a fool and is glorified
only in the karma-käëòa sections of the Vedas.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
370 Chapter 12
yadäsau niyame ‘kalpo jarayä jäta-vepathuù
ätmany agnén samäropya mac-citto ‘gnià samäviçet
When a vänaprastha approaches the old age, so that his body trembles and he can no
long perform his prescribed duties, then, in a trance of meditation, he should place the
sacrificial fire within his heart, fix his mind upon Me, and finally enter the fire to give
up his life.
COMMENTARY
The word akalpa means “being incapable.”
PURPORT
Only those who are attached to materialistic life, and who therefore suffer because
of their enjoying spirit, need enter fire to give up their bodies. When the mind is fixed
on the Supreme Lord, one does not see the need for relinquishing his body in this way.
Rather, by the performance of the congregational chanting of the holy name of Kåñëa,
the fire of material existence becomes extinguished.
yadä karma-vipäkeñu lokeñu nirayätmasu
virägo jäyate samyaì nyastägniù pravrajet tataù
If the vänaprastha develops detachment for everything material, even promotion to
Brahmaloka,  knowing  that  any  situation  resulting  from  the  fruits  of  one’s  activities  is
miserable, he can accept the renounced order of life, sannyäsa.
COMMENTARY
The phrase karma vipakeñu means “the result obtained by one’s actions.”
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Description of Varëäçrama-dharma
PURPORT
If  one  becomes  detached  from  the  aspiration  to  attain  any  of  the  higher  material
planets,  which  are  obtained  as  the  result  of  one’s  fruitive  actions,  then  one  should
surrender  unto  the  Supreme  Lord  and  dovetail  all  of  his  propensities  in  His  service.
In  this  way,  one  can  be  freed  from  material  desires  without  the  execution  of  severe
penance.
iñövä yathopadeçaà mäà dattvä sarva-svam åtvije
agnén sva-präëa äveçya nirapekñaù parivrajet
After worshiping Me for a long time, following the prescribed rules and regulations,
one should give everything in his possession to the sacrificial priest and then place the
sacrificial fire within himself. Having achieved a state of complete detachment, he should
accept the renounced order of life.
COMMENTARY
At this time, one should perform eight kinds of çräddhä and other rituals that are
described in the çästra.
PURPORT
After giving up all kinds of bad association, and after giving dakñiëä to the priests,
if one is fully engaged in the devotional service of the Supreme Lord, he is considered
eligible to take sannyäsa. Lusty desires are impediments to the service of the Supreme
Lord.  One  who  aspires  for  liberation  from  material  existence  should  give  up  all  lusty
activities and instead, accept the role of a mendicant who is only interested in rendering
service to the Supreme Lord.
viprasya vai sannyasato devä därädi-rüpiëaù
vighnän kurvanty ayaà hy asmän äkramya samiyät param
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
372 Chapter 12
“This sannyäsé will surpass us and attain the supreme destination.” Thinking like
this, the demigods try to create obstacles on the path of the sannyäséby appearing before
him  in  the  form  of  his  former  wife  and  other  women.  A  sannyäséshould  not  become
disturbed by this.
COMMENTARY
A sannyäsé should not be disturbed by the obstacles the demigods place before him.
When a brähmaëa takes sannyäsa, the demigods enter the body of his wife and try to
entangle him in sense gratification. Why do they create such impediments? Because they
are envious that the sannyäsé will surpass them by going back home, back to Godhead.
PURPORT
The demigods are administrators of universal affairs who award the fruits of one’s
actions. They may be born as one’s legitimate wife and children so that they can create
disturbances  on  the  path  of  a  person  who  is  cultivating  Kåñëa  consciousness.  When
one eagerly tries to render devotional service, the demigods attempt to put obstacles on
his path by posing as his wife, son, or friend. They try to misguide one from the path
of spiritual life by advertising that material enjoyment is the goal of human life. In the
name of religion, and on the pretext of duty, they misguide a sincere sannyäsé so that
he  falls  down  from  the  renounced  order  of  life  and  gives  up  his  desire  to  worship  the
Supreme Lord.
bibhåyäc cen munir väsaù kaupénäcchädanaà param
tyaktaà na daëòa-päträbhyäm anyat kiïcid anäpadi
If  a  sannyäsédesires  to  wear  something  more  than  a  kaupéna,  he  may  cover  his
waist and hips with another cloth. Except in the case of emergency, he should not carry
anything but his daëòa and waterpot.
COMMENTARY
The  duties  of  a  sannyäsé  are  being  described  in  this  verse.  He  should  wear  only
a  kaupénä,  or  if  he  wants  to  wear  something  more,  he  can  cover  his  waist  and  hips
with  another  cloth.  A  sannyäsé  should  not  carry  anything  more  than  a  daëòa  and  a
waterpot.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Description of Varëäçrama-dharma
PURPORT
A  sannyäsé  should  not  think  of  dressing  extravagantly  and  for  that  reason,  he  is
restricted to just a kaupénä and another piece of cloth. If he desires to possess something
more than a daëòa and a waterpot, that thirst for accumulating many luxurious objects
will certainly pollute the sannyäsé’s desire for worshiping the Supreme Lord.
dåñöi-pütaà nyaset pädaà vastra-pütaà pibej jalam
satya-pütäà vaded väcaà manaù-pütaà samäcaret
One who is trying to elevate himself to the transcendental platform should only place
his foot on the ground after seeing that there are no tiny insects there, so that he may
not cause any violence to any living entity. He should drink water only after straining it
through a piece of cloth, and he should speak only words that possess the purity of truth.
Similarly, he should only perform those activities that he has ascertained to be very pure
by nature.
PURPORT
While walking, a devotee of the Lord is careful not to kill any insects that may be
in his path. He strains his drinking water through a cloth just to make sure he doesn’t
drink  any  tiny  creatures.  Speaking  lies  to  enhance  one’s  sense  gratification  should  be
avoided because this is not suitable behavior for a devotee. Speech must be controlled so
that it is never used to condone impersonal philosophy or heavenly sense gratification,
because  such  sound  vibrations  contaminate  the  heart.  By  philosophically  considering
the matter very deeply, one should arrive at the conclusion that any activity other than
the devotional service of the Lord is absolutely useless. In this way, one should engage
in Kåñëa consciousness.
maunänéhäniläyämä daëòä väg-deha-cetasäm
na hy ete yasya santy aìga veëubhir na bhaved yatiù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
374 Chapter 12
My  dear  Uddhava,  one  who  does  not  avoid  useless  speech,  refrain  from  useless
endeavors,  and  control  his  body,  mind,  and  speech,  cannot  be  considered  a  sannyäsé
merely because he carries bamboo rods.
COMMENTARY
The  word  mauna  means  “refraining  from  useless  speech.”  The  word  anéha  means
“refraining  from  useless  activities.”  The  word  anila-äyämäù  means  “to  regulate  the
breathing.” One who is unable to control these three internal urges cannot be accepted
as a tridaëòi sannyäsé.
PURPORT
Here, the word daëòa indicates the staff carried by sannyäsés, and it also means “strict
discipline.”  Vaiñëava  sannyäsés  carry  a  staff  made  of  three  bamboo  rods  that  indicate
the dedication of his body, mind, and words to the service of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. However, one who simply carries daëòa without disciplining the activities of
his body, mind, and words, cannot be considered a true Vaiñëava sannyäsé, as indicated
in this verse.
In  the  Haàsa-gétä  section  of  the  Mahäbhärata,  and  in  Çréla  Rüpa  Gosvämé’s
Upadeçämåta, there are nice instructions on how to engage in the sannyäsa order of life.
A  neophyte  devotee  who  simply  adopts  the  external  ornaments  of  tridaëòé-sannyäsa
will  certainly  fail  to  control  his  senses.  One  who  accepts  the  renounced  order  of  life
simply  for  enhancing  his  false  prestige,  thus  making  a  show  of  being  an  advanced
devotee  without  actual  advancement  in  hearing  and  chanting  the  Lord’s  glories,  will
soon become a victim of the illusory energy of the Lord.
bhikñäà caturñu varëeñu vigarhyän varjayaàç caret
saptägärän asaìkÿptäàs tuñyel labdhena tävatä
Leaving aside the houses of those who have fallen from the standard of Vedic culture,
one should beg from seven houses and be satisfied with whatever is easily obtained. One
can beg food from anyone of the four social orders.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Description of Varëäçrama-dharma
COMMENTARY
Brähmaëas are qualified to accept charity, teach the Vedas, act as priests, or maintain
themselves by collecting rejected grains from the agricultural fields. A brähmaëa should
avoid begging alms from the houses of those who are cursed, or who are in a wretched
condition  of  life.  He  should  beg  alms  from  seven  houses  chosen  at  random,  without
considering who might be more favorable or generous.
PURPORT
There are three methods for begging alms—mädhukara, asaìklipta, and präkpraëita.
To  collect  just  a  little  food  from  many  houses—just  enough  for  his  maintenance—is
called  mädhukara.  This  is  the  best  method  for  a  sannyäsé  to  beg  alms.  The  process
mentioned in this verse is called asaëklipta, whereby one approaches seven houses and is
satisfied with whatever he receives. Präk-praëéta is that process by which one establishes
regular donors and collects one’s maintenance from them.
In this verse it is recommended that without discriminating, one should go to seven
houses  and  be  satisfied  with  whatever  may  be  obtained  there.  One  should  for  one’s
personal  maintenance  only  from  those  who  sincerely  observe  their  duties  within  the
varëäçrama  system,  and  not  from  those  who  have  neglected  this  culture,  especially  if
they are atheists.
bahir jaläçayaà gatvä tatropaspåçya väg-yataù
vibhajya pävitaà çeñaà bhuïjétäçeñam ähåtam
Taking the food collected by begging, one should leave the populated areas and go to a
reservoir of water in a solitary place. There, having taken a bath and washed one’s hands
thoroughly, one should distribute some of the food to those who request it. One should
do this without speaking. Thereafter, one should eat whatever remains, leaving nothing
for future consumption.
COMMENTARY
The sannyäsé should divide the food that he has collected, offering portions to Lord
Viñëu, Brahmä, the sun-god, and others who may request it. Thereafter, he should eat
whatever remains, not leaving any remnants on his plate.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
376 Chapter 12
PURPORT
One who is trying to advance on the path of devotional service should not get into
arguments with materialistic people who may ask for a portion of one’s food acquired by
begging. The word vibhajya indicates that one should give such persons what they ask
for, just to avoid a disturbance. After offering whatever remains to the Lord, one should
eat everything and not save anything for the future.
ekaç caren mahém etäà niùsaìgaù saàyatendriyaù
ätma-kréòa ätma-rata ätma-vän sama-darçanaù
A sannyäsé should travel over the earth without any companion, remaining free from
material desires by carefully controlling his mind and senses, and always seeing how the
Supreme  Lord  is  situated  within  the  hearts  of  all  living  beings.  With  equal  vision,  he
should remain fixed on the transcendental platform.
COMMENTARY
The word ätmarata indicates the state of self-satisfaction that results from realizing
the Supersoul within. The word ätmavän indicates that the sannyäsé should be steady
in the self.
PURPORT
One  cannot  remain  steady  in  his  worship  of  Lord  Hari  if  he  maintains  material
desires.  When  one  looks  towards  women  with  thoughts  of  sense  gratification,  there
is  no  possibility  of  controlling  the  senses.  For  this  reason,  one  should  engage  in  the
cultivation  of  Kåñëa  consciousness  twenty-four  hours  a  day.  When  one  is  thus  fully
engaged  in  glorifying  Lord  Kåñëa  and  engaging  in  His  devotional  service,  then  the
desire for worldly association will certainly diminish. The association of devotees is the
only remedy for curing the disease of bad association. Good association with Lord Kåñëa
and His devotees automatically vanquishes useless material association, and it helps one
to  carry  out  the  Vedic  injunctions  that  are  meant  to  lift  the  conditioned  soul  out  of
material darkness and place him onto the liberated platform of Kåñëa consciousness. In
this regard, Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé states in his Upadeçämåta (4):
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Description of Varëäçrama-dharma
dadäti pratigåhëäti guhyam äkhyäti påcchati
bhuìkte bhojayate caiva ñaò-vidhaà préti-lakñaëam
Offering  gifts  in  charity,  accepting  charitable  gifts,  revealing  one’s  mind  in
confidence, inquiring confidentially, accepting prasädam and offering prasädam
are the six symptoms of love shared by one devotee and another.
The  best  association  is  to  remain  in  the  association  of  devotees,  where  there  is
always hearing and chanting of the transcendental names, forms, qualities, associates,
and  pastimes  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Çré  Kåñëa.  The  association  of
devotees is not bad association because in that association, there are no discussions of
material topics. The devotees are all fully engaged in the devotional service of the Lord,
following in the footsteps of the inhabitants of Vraja. By the influence of such devotees,
one  develops  equal  vision  and  sees  the  realized  knowledge  of  Kåñëa  consciousness
everywhere.  As  one  begins  to  understand  his  eternal  relationship  with  Lord  Kåñëa,
he  becomes  ätmavän,  situated  in  his  constitutional  position.  An  advanced  Vaiñëava,
constantly  enjoying  the  mellows  of  loving  devotional  service  and  carrying  out  the
mission of the Lord on the earth, is ätma-kréòa, one who enjoys life within the internal
potency of the Supreme Lord. The advanced devotee remains constantly attracted to the
Supreme Lord and His devotees and is therefore ätma-rata, fully satisfied by constant
engagement  in  devotional  service.  One  cannot  possibly  develop  the  exalted  qualities
mentioned here without becoming an unalloyed devotee of Lord Kåñëa.
If  a  devotee  resides  in  a  place  where  enviousness  of  Kåñëa  and  His  devotees  is
prominent,  as  a  result  of  that  bad  association,  he  will  be  unable  to  control  his  senses
and thus begin to take interest in striving for religiosity, economic development, sense
gratification, and liberation. Instead of becoming fully absorbed in Kåñëa consciousness,
he will gradually come to resemble the non-devotees that surround him. Due to aversion
to Kåñëa’s service, one becomes attracted to worshiping the wonderful male and female
creations of the Lord’s illusory energy—demigods, demigoddesses, celebrities, politicians,
prostitutes,  etc.,  considering  these  ordinary  personalities  to  be  equal  to  Kåñëa.  The
transcendental Cupid, Kåñëa, is the only object of worship. When one realizes this fact,
his selfish mentality of worshiping many gods is vanquished.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
378 Chapter 12
vivikta-kñema-çaraëo mad-bhäva-vimaläçayaù
ätmänaà cintayed ekam abhedena mayä muniù
Dwelling in a solitary place without fear, a pure-hearted devotee should realize himself
as being non-different from Me.
COMMENTARY
To  think  of  the  spirit  soul  as  non-different  from  the  Supersoul  is  the  essence  of
säyujya mukti.
PURPORT
A pure devotee of the Lord is one whose only aim in life is to serve the Supreme
Lord in one of the five principle relationships. He has no interest other than the service
of the Lord and he never thinks of himself as qualitatively different from Him. It is one’s
false identification with the temporary gross and subtle bodies that causes one to think
of himself as being different from the Lord. Indeed, false identification with matter is
the  cause  of  all  kinds  of  misery.  To  remedy  this  situation,  one  should  render  service
to  the  Lord,  who  is  the  master  of  the  senses,  with  purified  senses.  When  the  mind  is
distracted from the service of the Lord, being attracted by the objects of the senses, one
again labors hard to fulfill his material desires under the influence of the three modes
of material nature. One who is not actually fixed in devotional service, beginning with
hearing and chanting the glories of the Lord, cannot be fearless, being deprived of the
Lord’s shelter. One should always consider how his constitutional position is that of a
minute part and parcel of the Lord, and thus non-different from Him.
anvékñetätmano bandhaà mokñaà ca jïäna-niñöhayä
bandha indriya-vikñepo mokña eñäà ca saàyamaù
By  the  cultivation  of  spiritual  knowledge,  one  should  clearly  ascertain  the  nature
of  bondage  and  liberation.  Bondage  occurs  when  the  senses  are  utilized  for  material
enjoyment, and liberation is attained when the senses are withdrawn from the enjoyment
of sense objects and exclusively engaged in My service.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Description of Varëäçrama-dharma
COMMENTARY
The word anvékñeta means “to see by careful study.”
PURPORT
One  who  remains  absorbed  in  thought  of  the  temporary  objects  of  this  world,
without any care for realizing his eternal self and his relationship with the Supreme Self,
his agitated senses will induce him to enjoy unrestricted gratification. If one restrains
his senses from unregulated enjoyment, he can get respite from their harassment.
tasmän niyamya ñaò-vargaà mad-bhävena caren muniù
viraktaù kñudra-kämebhyo labdhvätmani sukhaà mahat
Carefully controlling the five senses and the mind by always engaging them in the
devotional service of the Lord, one experiences transcendental happiness, giving one the
strength to remain detached from all kinds of material sense gratification, which are, after
all, quite insignificant.
COMMENTARY
The word ñaö-vargam refers to the six senses.
PURPORT
By  the  influence  of  cultivating  attachment  for  the  eternal,  pure,  complete  whole,
one  can  conquer  the  six  enemies—lust,  anger,  greed,  illusion,  pride,  and  envy.  If  one
renounces  the  thirst  of  insignificant  material  enjoyment  and  always  engages  in  the
Lord’s service, he will surely experience great transcendental happiness.
pura-gräma-vrajän särthän bhikñärthaà praviçaàç caret
puëya-deça-saric-chaila-vanäçrama-vatéà mahém
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
380 Chapter 12
One should travel to holy places of pilgrimage, or else remain by the side of rivers, or
in the solitude of mountains and forests. He should go to cities, towns, and agricultural
areas just to approach the materialists to beg for the bare necessities of life.
vänaprasthäçrama-padeñv abhékñëaà bhaikñyam äcaret
saàsidhyaty äçv asammohaù çuddha-sattvaù çiländhasä
One  in  the  vänaprastha  order  of  life  should  be  accustomed  to  accept  charity  from
others because by this practice he will be freed from illusion and quickly become perfect
in  spiritual  life.  Indeed,  one  who  subsists  on  food  grains  obtained  in  such  a  humble
manner purifies his existence.
COMMENTARY
The word çiländhasä means “to collect food grains scattered in the market places.”
By eating such food, the heart becomes purified.
PURPORT
If a materialistic sense enjoyer aspires to free himself from material entanglement,
he must engage in begging alms for his subsistence because this will force him to humble
himself before others. When one becomes freed from all desires for material enjoyment
in  this  way,  he  no  longer  remains  a  fool.  He  learns  to  be  satisfied  with  whatever  he
collects by begging, and because of the purity of his heart, he attains perfection.
naitad vastutayä paçyed dåçyamänaà vinaçyati
asakta-citto viramed ihämutra-cikérñität
One  should  never  think  that  the  temporary  arrangements  of  matter  are  ultimate
reality.  Keeping  oneself  free  from  material  attachment,  one  should  give  up  all  kinds  of
endeavor meant for material betterment, both in this life and the next.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Description of Varëäçrama-dharma
COMMENTARY
One may doubt, “How can a gentleman give up delicious food to eat dry particles of
rice?” The answer is given here: “Do not see delicious food as real because in due course
of time, it will be destroyed. Considering this, one should never endeavor for material
gain, both in this life and in the life after death.”
yad etad ätmani jagan mano-väk-präëa-saàhatam
sarvaà mäyeti tarkeëa sva-sthas tyaktvä na tat smaret
One  should  consider  the  cosmic  manifestation,  which  includes  one’s  physical  body,
mind, life-air, and speech, and which is situated within the Lord, to be a product of His
illusory  energy.  One  should  remain  self-situated,  fully  renouncing  the  hope  that  such
temporary manifestations can grant him happiness.
COMMENTARY
This material world is the effect of the three modes of material nature. The word
tyaktvä indicates that one must give up one’s false identification with the material world
and  the  material  body,  since  both  are  merely  products  of  the  illusory  potency  of  the
Lord.
PURPORT
Instead  of  striving  for  material  objects,  if  one  hankers  for  the  Lord’s  mercy,  his
material  attachment  will  gradually  diminish.  According  to  one’s  previous  memories,
one develops a thirst for enjoying temporary objects with his body, mind, and speech.
However, if one becomes inclined toward the service of the Supreme Lord, his previous
memories will no longer misguide him.
jïäna-niñöho virakto vä mad-bhakto vänapekñakaù
sa-liìgän äçramäàs tyaktvä cared avidhi-gocaraù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
382 Chapter 12
A learned transcendentalist who has renounced all desires for sense gratification by
engaging in the cultivation of knowledge, as well as My devotee, who doesn’t even desire
liberation,  neglect  the  ritualistic  performances  mentioned  in  the  Vedas.  They  are  not
bound by those prescribed rules and regulation that guide persons influenced by the three
modes of material nature.
COMMENTARY
Here, the paramahaàsa stage is described. In such a transcendental position, one no
longer bothers to perform religious rituals meant for conditioned souls. Both the jïäna-
yogé  who  aspires  for  liberation,  and  the  pure  devotee  of  the  Lord  who  does  not  care
for liberation, are detached from all kinds of material activities. When the  mind has
become completely purified, there is no more chance for engagement in sinful acts. The
rules and regulations that are prescribed in the Vedas guide those who are enamored by
thoughts of gratifying the senses. One on the transcendental platform can move about
freely, as herein described by the Lord. However, one who is still materially contaminated
should not artificially try to imitate such an exalted position, and thus make a mockery
of his spiritual life.
PURPORT
The principal duty of a sannyäsé is to remain disinterested in material enjoyment.
The enjoyment of temporary objects by uncontrolled senses creates obstacles on the path
of self-realization. The pure devotee of the Lord, being totally disinterested in material
enjoyment because of being fully engaged in the service of the Lord, is beyond the range
of rules and regulations, and thus can freely wander over the earth at will. Rules and
regulations are meant to guide those who are still easily misguided by the urges of their
uncontrolled mind and senses. It is only when one rises to the stage of  paramahaàsa
that one can abandon the various rituals, paraphernalia and disciplines prescribed for
his spiritual order. This is clearly stated in the Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya-lila 22.23)
as follows:
eta saba chäòi’ ära varëäçrama-dharma
akiïcana haïä laya kåñëaika-çaraëa
Without hesitation, one should take exclusive shelter of Lord Kåñëa with full
confidence, giving up bad association and even neglecting the regulative principles
of  the  four  varëas and  four  äçramas.  That  is  to  say,  one  should  abandon  all
material attachment.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Description of Varëäçrama-dharma
budho bälaka-vat kréòet kuçalo jaòa-vac caret
vaded unmatta-vad vidvän go-caryäà naigamaç caret
Although  most  wise,  the  paramahaàsa  should  behave  like  a  child,  not  caring  for
honor  or  dishonor.  Although  most  expert,  he  should  act  like  one  who  is  incompetent.
Although most learned, he should speak like a madman, and although well-versed in the
Vedas, he should behave in an unrestricted manner.
COMMENTARY
A paramahaàsa conceals his exalted position out of fear that the great adoration
the public will offer him may disturb his equilibrium. Thus, although possessing great
wisdom,  he  may  behave  in  a  childish  manner.  Although  very  expert,  he  may  act  like
one who is incompetent. Although very learned, he may speak just like a madman, and
although a great Vedic scholar, he may behave like a fool.
PURPORT
Although neglecting ordinary rules and regulations, a paramahaàsa does not ever
become  sinful  or  immoral,  but  rather  neglects  ritualistic  aspects  of  religious  custom,
such as dressing in a particular way, performing certain ceremonies or executing specific
penances  and  austerities.  Materialistic  people,  by  means  of  their  external  perception,
cannot understand the exalted position of a paramahaàsa and thus they commit offenses
that  bring  about  their  ruination.  One  who  does  not  understand  the  purport  of  this
verse of Çré Rüpa Goswämé will certainly remain fixed in a conception of materialistic
varnäçrama.
dåñöaiù svabhäva-janitair vapuñaç ca doñair
na präkåtatvam iha bhakta janasya paçyet
gaìgämbhasäà na khalu budbuda-phena-paìkair
brahma-dravatvam apagacchati néra-dharmaiù
Being situated in his original Kåñëa conscious position, a pure devotee does
not identify with the body. Such a devotee should not be seen from a materialistic
point of view. Indeed, one should overlook a devotee’s having a body born in a low
family, a body with a bad complexion, a deformed body, or a diseased or infirm
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
384 Chapter 12
body.  According  to  ordinary  vision,  such  imperfections  may  seem  prominent
in  the  body  of  a  pure  devotee,  but  despite  such  seeming  defects,  the  body  of
a  pure  devotee  cannot  be  polluted.  It  is  exactly  like  the  waters  of  the  Ganges,
which  sometimes  during  the  rainy  season  are  full  of  bubbles,  foam  and  mud.
The Ganges waters do not become polluted. Those who are advanced in spiritual
understanding will bathe in the Ganges without considering the condition of the
water.  (Çré Upadeçämåta 6)
veda-väda-rato na syän na päñaëòé na haitukaù
çuñka-väda-viväde na kaïcit pakñaà samäçrayet
A  devotee  of  the  Lord  should  not  divert  himself  to  engage  in  the  fruitive  rituals
recommended in the karma-käëòa sections of the Vedas. Of course, he should not indulge
in an atheistic mentality by speaking against the Vedic injunctions. A devotee should also
avoid acting like a mundane logician, taking part in useless arguments.
COMMENTARY
Although  a  paramahaàsa  hides  his  actual  position,  he  is  still  restrained  from
performing certain activities. He should not advocate fruitive activities just to conceal
himself, nor should he disguise himself as an atheist or dress as a Buddhist, or member
of any other atheistic cult opposing the Vedas.
PURPORT
The  whole  purpose  of  the  Vedas  is  to  understand  that  which  is  beyond  material
experience, so the devotees of the Lord do not become involved in dry arguments about
the Vedas, like expert fruitive workers. They do not waste their time in useless speculation
that culminates in placing the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the possessor
of  unlimited  energies,  in  the  same  category  as  the  demigods,  who  are  subordinate  to
Him, being His empowered representatives. Devotees have no desire for being praised,
and thus never take sides in mundane arguments. In this regard one should discuss the
following verse from Çré Upadeçämåta 2.
atyähäraù prayäsaç ca prajalpo niyamägrahaù
jana-saìgaç ca laulyaà ca ñaòbhir bhaktir vinaçyati
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Description of Varëäçrama-dharma
One’s  devotional  service  is  spoiled  when  he  becomes  too  entangled  in  the
following six activities: (1) eating more than necessary or collecting more funds
than required; (2) over-endeavoring for mundane things that are very difficult to
obtain; (3) talking unnecessarily about mundane subject matters; (4) Practicing
the scriptural rules and regulations only for the sake of following them and not
for  the  sake  of  spiritual  advancement,  or  rejecting  the  rules  and  regulations  of
the  scriptures  and  working  independently  or  whimsically;  (5)  associating  with
worldly-minded persons who are not interested in Kåñëa consciousness; and (6)
being greedy for mundane achievements.
nodvijeta janäd dhéro janaà codvejayen na tu
ati-vädäàs titikñeta nävamanyeta kaïcana
deham uddiçya paçu-vad vairaà kuryän na kenacit
A transcendentalist should not become frightened or disturbed by others, nor should
he ever act in a way that disturbs others, or makes them fearful. He should tolerate the
insults  others  hurl  at  him,  and  he  should  not  criticize  others.  He  should  never  create
enmity simply for some material advantage, for that would make him no better than an
animal.
COMMENTARY
The phrase ati-väda means “very harsh words.”
PURPORT
A saintly person does not cause anxiety to any living entity by means of his body,
mind, or speech. In this regard, one should carefully contemplate this verse, which was
spoken by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu.
tåëäd api sunécena taror api sahiñëunä
amäninä mänadena kértanéyaù sadä hariù
One  should  chant  the  holy  name  of  the  Lord  in  a  humble  state  of  mind,
thinking oneself lower than the straw in the street. One should be more tolerant
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
386 Chapter 12
than  a  tree,  devoid  of  all  sense  of  false  prestige,  and  ready  to  offer  all  respect
to  others.  In  such  a  state  of  mind,  one  can  chant  the  holy  name  of  the  Lord
constantly.
eka eva paro hy ätmä bhüteñv ätmany avasthitaù
yathendur uda-pätreñu bhütäny ekätmakäni ca
The one Supreme Lord is situated within the bodies of all living entities, and indeed,
within their very self. Just as the moon is reflected on the surface of innumerable bodies
of water, the Supersoul, although one, is present everywhere. Every material body is thus
composed of the energy of the one Supreme Lord.
COMMENTARY
The understanding that frees one from enviousness is being described in this verse.
The  Supersoul  is  present  within  all  living  entities.  Just  as  the  moon,  although  one,  is
reflected in innumerable pots of water, the Supersoul, although one, is present within
all  living  entities  as  the  supreme  director.  Therefore,  one  should  not  envy  anyone,
knowing  that  the  Supreme  Lord  is  present  within  all  material  bodies,  which  are  also
manifestations of His energy.
PURPORT
An object and its reflection are certainly similar in many respects but one should
never think that they are actually equal and thus disregard the object. The material bodies
of the conditioned souls may certainly be subject to criticism but by understanding how
the Supreme Lord is present within each of them, one should free himself by thoughts
of duality, which are prominent in the society of animals. The devotees of the Lord are
never hostile or violent toward anyone, knowing that everyone is the eternal servant of
God.
alabdhvä na viñédeta käle käle ‘çanaà kvacit
labdhvä na håñyed dhåtimän ubhayaà daiva-tantritam
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Description of Varëäçrama-dharma
If sometimes one does not get enough food, one should not be discouraged, just as
when one receives delicious food, he should not become overjoyed. Being fixed in firm
determination to remain a faithful devotee, one should understand both situations to be
under the control of the Supreme Lord.
COMMENTARY
The phrase daiva tantritam means “under the control of providence.”
PURPORT
Happiness  and  distress  come  automatically  in  due  course  of  time  and  thus  one
should  remain  undisturbed  in  either  condition.  We  foolishly  consider  ourselves  to  be
the  doers  of  our  activities,  but  due  to  this  false  ego  of  thinking  ourselves  to  be  the
controllers, we are forced to experience happiness and distress, according to the quality
of our activities.
ähärärthaà saméheta yuktaà tat-präëa-dhäraëam
tattvaà vimåçyate tena tad vijïäya vimucyate
If required, one should endeavor to get sufficient food, because one should carefully
maintain his health. By keeping the body fit, one can cultivate spiritual truth and thereby
attain liberation.
COMMENTARY
If food does not come automatically, or by begging, one should make an endeavor
because  food  is  necessary  to  sustain  one’s  life.  If  one’s  body  is  in  a  healthy  condition,
one can cultivate God consciousness without disturbance and as a result, make steady
advancement.
PURPORT
One should not eat too much, nor eat too little. One should eat only as much as is
required  to  keep  the  body  fit  for  rendering  devotional  service  to  the  Lord.  Normally,
those  who  are  endeavoring  in  spiritual  life  cannot  maintain  steady  concentration  if
their  mind  and  body  are  weakened  by  under-eating.  On  the  other  hand,  extravagant
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
388 Chapter 12
eating  is  a  great  impediment  for  spiritual  advancement  and  therefore  should  be  given
up.
yadåcchayopapannännam adyäc chreñöham utäparam
tathä väsas tathä çayyäà präptaà präptaà bhajen muniù
A transcendentalist should accept whatever food, clothing, and bedding comes of its
own accord, whether they be very good or very poor.
COMMENTARY
It is best if one can obtain food without any endeavor. A sage should not discriminate
between delicious and tasteless food. He should be happy with whatever he is destined
to obtain.
çaucam äcamanaà snänaà na tu codanayä caret
anyäàç ca niyamäï jïäné yathähaà lélayeçvaraù
I  am  the  Supreme  Lord  and  yet  I  execute  regulative  duties  by  My  own  free  will.
Similarly,  one  who  is  advancing  in  self-realization  should  wash  his  hands,  bathe,  and
perform other regulative duties, just to lead others on the right path.
COMMENTARY
A devotee of the Lord is not a servant of rules and regulations, he is a servant of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Still, he executes the regulative duties in relation to the
material body by his own free will and not as a servant of the rules and regulations.
PURPORT
One  who  leads  his  life  in  a  way  that  is  favorable  for  the  service  of  the  Supreme
Lord is always a liberated soul, although situated within the material world. Devotees of
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Description of Varëäçrama-dharma
the Lord on the paramahaàsa platform are not compelled to perform bodily activities,
such as brushing the teeth or bathing, like ordinary people. Such a paramahaàsa may
be impure or unclean according to material estimation, because he is a servant of Lord
Kåñëa and not of rules and regulations.
na hi tasya vikalpäkhyä yä ca mad-vékñayä hatä
ä-dehäntät kvacit khyätis tataù sampadyate mayä
A self-realized soul does not see anything as separate from Me, because he has passed
out of the dense darkness of illusion. However, because of his previous habits that absorbed
his body and mind in sense gratification, he may sometimes be seen to act like an ordinary
conditioned soul. Still, upon quitting his body at the time of death, such a devotee will be
awarded My divine opulence.
COMMENTARY
On  the  strength  of  realized  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  one  gives  up  the  illusion  that
anything,  anywhere,  at  any  time,  can  be  separate  from  Him.  Still,  Lord  Kåñëa  has
said that a devotee must keep his material body and mind fit for executing devotional
service.  Therefore,  even  a  self-realized  soul  may  sometimes  appear  to  accept  or  reject
certain conditions within this world. Such brief apparent duality of concentration upon
material conditions does not change the liberated status of a self-realized soul, however,
because he never forgets to see everything in relation to the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
A devotee does not see anything as being separate from Lord Kåñëa, and he does
not  consider  his  position  within  the  material  world  to  be  permanent.  His  only  desire
is  to  render  service  to  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  Just  as  materialistic  men
are  always  found  making  arrangements  for  their  personal  enjoyment,  devotees  are
busy  throughout  the  day  and  night,  planning  how  to  best  serve  the  Lord.  Thus,  they
have no inclination to waste their time in the frivolous entertainments sought by the
materialists. Materialistic men cannot understand this mentality of the devotee and so
they sometimes dare to criticize him, thinking him to be just like an ordinary man. At
the time of death, however, the results of the devotees and the results obtained by the
materialists are very different.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
390 Chapter 12
duùkhodarkeñu kämeñu jäta-nirveda ätmavän
ajjïäsita-mad-dharmo munià gurum upavrajet
One who has become disgusted with material enjoyment, knowing that it ultimately
produces only misery, and who desires spiritual perfection, but has not understood the
process for attaining it, should approach a spiritual master who is fixed in the devotional
service of the Supreme Lord.
COMMENTARY
The  Supreme  Lord  said:  One  who  has  attained  wisdom  and  has  thus  become
disgusted with the miserable condition of material enjoyment should inquire about Me,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For that purpose, he should approach a bona fide
spiritual master and thus receive transcendental knowledge in relation to Me.
PURPORT
One who is actually intelligent should be inquisitive to understand the cause of his
suffering in this temporary world of birth and death. Thus, he should take shelter of a
bona fide spiritual master, who is fully devoted to the service of the Lord and is therefore
detached  from  desires  for  insignificant  material  enjoyment.  Materialists,  who  are  not
engaged  in  the  devotional  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  are  always  baffled  in  their
attempts to enjoy the material world and as a result, they are certainly in a miserable
condition of life. A sober person who has realized the futility of material existence can
become freed from material bondage by taking shelter of an experienced devotee of the
Lord, thus giving up all unwanted association.
tävat paricared bhaktaù çraddhävän anasüyakaù
yävad brahma vijänéyän mäm eva gurum ädåtaù
Until a devotee has practical realization of the Absolute Truth, he should continue to
respectfully render service to the spiritual master, who is non-different from Me.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Description of Varëäçrama-dharma
COMMENTARY
The  Supreme  Lord  said:  The  spiritual  master  is  non-different  from  Me,  being  an
external manifestation of My mercy.
PURPORT
A devotee who has pleased his spiritual master and is thus endowed with realization
of the truth can directly engage in the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
It is indicated in this verse that as long as one has not become sufficiently convinced of
the truth of the teachings of his spiritual master, he should remain very close to his guru,
to render personal service.
TEXTS 40-41
yas tv asaàyata-ñaò-vargaù pracaëòendriya-särathiù
jïäna-vairägya-rahitas tri-daëòam upajévati
surän ätmänam ätma-sthaà nihnute mäà ca dharma-hä
avipakva-kañäyo ‘smäd amuñmäc ca vihéyate
One  who  is  devoid  of  knowledge  and  renunciation,  who  has  not  conquered  his  six
enemies—lust, anger, greed, envy, false pride, and illusion—who is forcefully driven by
the charioteer of his mind, who makes a show of being in the renounced order of life,
sannyäsa, simply for earning his livelihood, who denies himself and the Supersoul within,
is doomed both in this life and the next.
COMMENTARY
The  Lord  herein  condemns  imitation  sannyäsés  who  adopt  the  garb  of  a  saintly
person simply to gain material advantage. Such a person certainly cheats himself while
disregarding the demigods and the Supersoul within. Such a bogus sannyäsé lives a most
condemned existence, both in this world and in the next.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
392 Chapter 12
PURPORT
One who is not engaged in the devotional service of the Lord must be also devoid of
genuine knowledge and renunciation. Unless the senses are fully engaged in the service of
the Lord, they will restlessly drag one into inferior pursuits. Thus becoming a servant of his
senses, the non-devotee fails to properly regulate his bodily activities, mind, and speech.
One who adopts the dress of a sannyäsé simply for filling his belly is never accepted
by intelligent followers of Vedic principles. However, such a so-called sannyäsé who ruins
all Vedic religious principles sometimes becomes famous among foolish persons, but they
are simply cheating themselves and their followers. These charlatan sannyäsés are never
actually engaged in the loving devotional service of Lord Kåñëa, and so the result they
achieve is far different from that attained by genuine devotees.
bhikñor dharmaù çamo ‘hiàsä tapa ékñä vanaukasaù
gåhiëo bhüta-rakñejyä dvijasyäcärya-sevanam
The  main  religious  duties  of  a  sannyäséare  equanimity  and  nonviolence,  whereas
for a vänaprastha, austerity and the knowledge by which one can discriminate between
matter and spirit are prominent. The main duties of a gåhastha are to give protection to
all  living  entities  and  perform  sacrifices,  and  the  duty  of  a  brahmacäréis  to  serve  the
spiritual master.
COMMENTARY
The duty of a sannyäsé is to carefully control his mind and to remain free from envy
of others. The duty of a vänaprastha is to perform austerities and clearly understand the
difference between the body and the soul. The duty of a gåhastha is to give shelter to all
living entities and perform sacrifices. The duty of a brahmacäré is to serve the spiritual
master.
PURPORT
A brahmacäré’s duty is to serve the spiritual master. A gåhastha’s duty is to maintain
all living entities and engage in the service of the Supreme Lord while carefully observing
religious principles. A vänaprastha’s duty is to perform austerity and master the power of
discrimination between matter and spirit. The duty of a sannyäsé is to constantly engage
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Description of Varëäçrama-dharma
in the service of the Supreme Lord without causing any anxiety to any living creature
by means of his body, mind, or speech.
brahmacaryaà tapaù çaucaà santoño bhüta-sauhådam
gåhasthasyäpy åtau gantuù sarveñäà mad-upäsanam
A householder should only engage in sexual intercourse with his wife at the times
that are prescribed for begetting children. At other times, the householder should practice
celibacy, austerity, purity of his body and mind, remaining satisfied in his position, and
displaying friendship towards all living entities. Worship of Me is to be practiced by all
human beings, regardless of his social or occupational status.
COMMENTARY
Generally,  a  householder  should  practice  celibacy,  although  he  may  indulge  in
sex with his wife after her menstrual period, only for the purpose of procreation. The
members of all the varëas and äçramas are duty-bound to worship the Supreme Lord.
Without this understanding, the observance of religious principles is ultimately useless.
This is confirmed in these two verses from the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.5.2-3):
mukha-bähüru-pädebhyaù puruñasyäçramaiù saha
catväro jajïire varëä guëair viprädayaù påthak
From the mouth of Brahmä, the brahminical order has come into existence.
Similarly,  from  his  arms  the  kñatriyas  have  come,  from  his  waist  the  vaiçyas
have come, and from his legs the çüdras have come. These four orders and their
spiritual  counterparts  (brahmacarya,  gåhastha,  vänaprastha,  and  sannyäsa)
combine to make human society complete.
ya eñäà puruñaà säkñäd ätma-prabhavam éçvaram
na bhajanty avajänanti sthänäd bhrañöäù patanty adhaù
If one simply maintains an official position in the four varëas and äçramas
but does not worship the Supreme Lord Viñëu, he falls down from his puffed-up
position into a hellish condition.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
394 Chapter 12
PURPORT
It is the duty of the members of all the four äçramas to serve the Supreme Lord. A
householder should practice celibacy, except that he may enjoy sex with his wife at an
appropriate time, only for the sake of begetting children. A householder should act for
the benefit all living entities, and he should remain pure and satisfied with his position
in life.
iti mäà yaù sva-dharmeëa bhajen nityam ananya-bhäk
sarva-bhüteñu mad-bhävo mad-bhaktià vindate dåòhäm
One  who  gives  up  all  other  kinds  of  worship  and  engages  in  My  service  by  the
performance  of  his  occupational  duty,  remembering  that  I  am  present  within  all  living
entities, achieves unflinching devotional service unto Me.
COMMENTARY
In whatever social or occupational division of human society one may be, one must
be  a  devotee  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  and  worship  Him  alone.  In  the
Vedas it is sometime prescribed that householders should worship particular demigods
or  forefathers.  How  then  can  such  householders  be  considered  unalloyed  devotees  of
the Supreme Lord? The answer is that those who cannot come to the standard of pure
devotional service should at least meditate upon the Personality of Godhead as being
situated within the demigods and all other living entities, understanding that all religious
processes are ultimately meant for the pleasure of the Lord.
PURPORT
While engaged in performing one’s varëäçrama duties, one should see the Lord as
the basis of everything. A devotee should concentrate on pleasing the Supreme Lord by
all of his activities because this alone will enable him to be elevated to the stage of life
called love of God, and thus bring him to the point of actual liberation. On the other
hand,  those  who  simply  execute  their  duties  within  the  varëäçrama  system  without
trying  to  see  everything  in  relation  to  Kåñëa  will  be  unable  to  attain  the  platform  of
devotional service to the Lord. To see how every living entity is engaged in the service
of the Lord is the vision of the topmost Vaiñëava.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Description of Varëäçrama-dharma
bhaktyoddhavänapäyinyä sarva-loka-maheçvaram
sarvotpatty-apyayaà brahma käraëaà mopayäti saù
My dear Uddhava, I am the Supreme Lord of all creation and I create and destroy this
universe, being its ultimate cause. I am the Absolute Truth and one who worships Me
with unfailing devotional service comes to Me.
COMMENTARY
The  Supreme  Lord  said:  One  who  worships  Me  in  unalloyed  devotional  service
achieves My shelter. I am the ultimate cause of all the universes. My pure devotee achieves
the liberation known as särñöi, whereby he achieves opulence like Mine. However, one
who  worships  My  impersonal  feature  attains  säyujya  mukti,  the  liberation  of  merging
into My effulgence of Brahman.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is the ultimate cause of this material world’s creation, maintenance,
and destruction. He is the supreme object of knowledge. By worshiping Him by means of
unalloyed devotional service, one attains His shelter.
iti sva-dharma-nirëikta-sattvo nirjïäta-mad-gatiù
jïäna-vijïäna-sampanno na cirät samupaiti mäm
One  who  has  purified  himself  by  the  performance  of  his  prescribed  duties,  who
understands  My  supreme  position,  and  who  has  attained  theoretical  and  practical
knowledge, will soon come to Me.
COMMENTARY
In this verse, the Lord concludes His instructions.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
396 Chapter 12
PURPORT
If  one  cultivates  the  knowledge  of  his  relationship  with  the  Supreme  Lord  while
executing  his  occupational  duties  and  remaining  aloof  from  bad  association,  he  will
gradually rise to the platform of pure goodness and thus receive the treasure of unalloyed
devotional service to the Lord. This is life’s ultimate goal.
varëäçramavatäà dharma eña äcära-lakñaëaù
sa eva mad-bhakti-yuto niùçreyasa-karaù paraù
Those  who  are  followers  of  this  varëäçrama  system  accept  religious  principles
according to authorized traditions that govern proper conduct. When such religious duties
are dedicated to Me in loving service, they award one the supreme perfection of life.
COMMENTARY
After  describing  pradhäëé  bhütä  bhakti,  the  Lord  herein  talks  about  guëébhütä
bhakti. The Supreme Lord said: If the duties entrusted to the followers of the varnäçrama
system are dovetailed in My devotional service, they award one the supreme perfection
of life.
PURPORT
The path of renunciation entails giving up all varieties of sense gratification, and
so  it  is  very  difficult  for  ordinary  people  to  perform.  Those  who  are  engaged  in  the
devotional service of the Lord under proper guidance automatically achieve the result
of renunciation because all of their activities are offered at the lotus feet of the Lord.
Thus  it  should  be  understood  that  unalloyed  devotion  for  the  Supreme  Lord  is  the
ultimate fruit of engaging in the occupational and religious duties prescribed within the
varëäçrama system.
etat te ‘bhihitaà sädho bhavän påcchati yac ca mäm
yathä sva-dharma-saàyukto bhakto mäà samiyät param
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Description of Varëäçrama-dharma
My dear Uddhava, I have thus answered your question as you had asked Me about
how  a  devotee,  perfectly  following  his  occupational  duties  can  attain  Me,  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
Thus  ends  the  translation  of  the  twelveth  chapter  of  the  Uddhava-géta,  entitled
“Descriptions  of  Varëäçrama-dharma”  with  the  commentaries  of  Çréla  Viçvanätha
Cakravarté  Öhäkura,  and  the  chapter  summary  and  purports  of  Çréla  Bhaktisiddhänta
Sarasvaté Öhäkura.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 13
the PerfeCtIon of sPIrItuaL KnowLedge
CHAPTER SUMMARY
This chapter describes how the jïänés eventually give up their method of acquiring
knowledge, whereas the pure devotees remain engaged in devotional service eternally.
Also described in this chapter are the different practices of the yogés, beginning with
yama.
The Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa said to Uddhava, “One who is actually wise, who knows
the science of the self and is endowed with spiritual insight, rejects this material world
of dualities and the so-called knowledge that facilitates enjoying it. He instead engages
himself  in  trying  to  satisfy  the  Supreme  Lord,  the  master  of  all.  This  is  called  pure
devotional  service.  Transcendental  knowledge  is  superior  to  ordinary  pious  activities,
such  as  the  chanting  of  mantras,  but  pure  devotional  service  is  even  superior  to  the
cultivation of transcendental knowledge.”
After this, when Çré Kåñëa was asked by Uddhava to explain in detail the processes
of  acquiring  transcendental  knowledge  and  devotional  service,  the  Lord  related  the
same instructions that the greatest of Vaiñëavas, Bhéñmadeva, had imparted to Mahäräja
Yudhiñöhira after the battle of Kurukñetra. Following this, after being asked about yama
and  other  practices  of  yoga,  the  Lord  described  the  twelve  kinds  of  yama,  beginning
with nonviolence, and twelve types of niyama, beginning with cleanliness.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
400 Chapter 13
çré-bhagavän uväca
yo vidyä-çruta-sampannaù ätmavän nänumänikaù
mayä-mätram idaà jïätvä jïänaà ca mayi sannyaset
The Supreme Lord said: One who has cultivated knowledge of the self up to the point
of realization of his eternity, and who has given up speculative knowledge, understanding
the material universe to be a temporary illusory manifestation, should no longer endeavor
to cultivate knowledge by speculative means.
COMMENTARY
This  chapter  describes  renunciation  as  practiced  by  the  jïänés,  and  the  eternal
devotional service that is practiced by the pure devotees, as well as the practices of the
yogés, beginning with yama and niyama.
A conditioned souls must somehow free himself of his illusory existence, which has
entrapped him since time immemorial. One means for accomplishing this is the practice
of  the  eight-fold  yoga  system  after  renouncing  all  material  desires.  By  this  difficult
process,  one  can  gradually  lift  himself  above  the  darkness  of  ignorance.  However,
when one is actually situated on the transcendental platform, there is no more need to
cultivate spiritual knowledge for the purpose of dispelling his material entanglement. For
example, a man haunted by a ghost may take help from mantras, herbs, and other such
remedial measures. However, when he is no longer possessed by the ghost, all such things
have no practical value for him. Here, the word vidyä refers to knowledge acquired by
philosophical speculation, mystic yoga practice, austerities, and so on. Such knowledge of
the illusory nature of material existence certainly dispels ignorance, and there are many
Vedic scriptures that impart such knowledge. After one gives up his false identification
with the material body and mind, one must further advance by engaging in the loving
service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When one becomes advanced in Kåñëa
consciousness, there is no more need to dispel illusion.
PURPORT
The  scriptures  recommend  that  one  adopt  the  processes  of  karma,  jïäna,  and
bhakti,  as  a  means  to  attain  the  ultimate  goal  of  life.  The  living  entities’  conditional
state is due to their material conception of life. When the conditioned souls are under
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Perfection of Spiritual Knowledge
the  influence  of  the  three  modes  of  material  nature,  they  are  filled  with  mundane
conceptions  and  puffed  up  because  of  false  ego.  Because  of  false  ego,  the  conditioned
souls think themselves to be the enjoyers of this temporary material world. When facing
competition,  they  attempt  to  defeat  their  opponents  so  that  they  can  maintain  their
attempts to indulge in temporary and insignificant material enjoyment.
Whenever there is an absence of knowledge of self-realization, a conditioned soul,
being  under  the  control  of  false  ego  and  devoid  of  devotional  service  to  the  Supreme
Lord, yearns for liberation. However, such desires for liberation are another manifestation
of false ego. When one’s knowledge of self-realization is directed to the service of the
Supreme Lord, so that one is actively engaged in the service of the Lord—that is the
perfection of karma and jïäna.
A living entity that has fallen from his constitutional position is naturally covered
by  conceptions  of  karma  and  jïäna.  The  ignorance  that  is  the  result  of  the  misuse
of one’s minute independence, coupled with the desire to lord it over material nature,
leads one to attempt to bring the Supreme Lord under one’s control. Such an illusion
created  by  perverted  knowledge  induces  the  conditioned  soul  to  think  that  he  is  the
enjoyer of all that he surveys. Due to the absence of devotional service, such a person
thinks  himself  to  be  non-different  from  the  Supreme  Lord,  and  thus  readily  accepts
the philosophy of Mäyäväda. When under the shelter of Mäyäväda philosophy, a living
entity  falls  into  various  inauspicious  situations  because  of  his  ignorance  of  spiritual
variegatedness. Although appearing to be engaged as a transcendentalist, such a person’s
material conception of life is evident because he sees everything in a spirit of enjoyment
and thus utilizes his senses for personal sense gratification.
A self-realized soul who has crossed the boundary of inauspiciousness is not attracted
to cultivating knowledge by direct perception or hypotheses, which are the domain of
mundane philosophers. He is liberated from the darkness of ignorance and has graduated
to  the  platform  of  pure  devotional  service  by  accepting  a  spiritual  master  in  disciplic
succession.  Such  a  self-realized  soul  gives  up  the  impersonal  Brahman  conception  of
the Absolute Truth, as well as all desires for fruitive activities, and thus remains fixed
in unalloyed devotional service to the Lord. He directs all of his activities and whatever
knowledge he possesses to the service of the Supreme Lord. The result is that he attains
the blissful state of eternal existence, being situated in his eternal constitutional duty of
loving devotional service to the Supreme Lord.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
402 Chapter 13
jïäninas tv aham eveñöaù svärtho hetuç ca sammataù
svargaç caiväpavargaç ca nänyo ‘rtho mad-åte priyaù
For those who are actually jï änés, I am the worshipable Lord, goal of life, means for
attaining the goal of life, and ultimate aim of knowledge. I am the only object of their
happiness, and I remove their unhappiness. Therefore, no one is more dear to them than
Me.
COMMENTARY
Someone  may  question,  “Should  one  give  up  the  practice  of  devotional  service  at
some stage, just as one gives up speculative knowledge after attaining liberation?” The
Supreme  Lord  says,  “Devotional  service  should  never  be  given  up.  I  am  the  ultimate
object of worship and so how could one consider giving up My worship? I am the ultimate
goal of truly learned transcendentalists, and I am also the means for attaining freedom
from delusion. This was previously described by Me in the Bhagavad-gétä, in the verse
beginning with brahmabhüta prasannätma, as well as this verse:
bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti yävän yaç cäsmi tattvataù
tato mäà tattvato jïätvä viçate tad-anantaram
One  can  understand  Me  as  I  am,  as  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,
only by devotional service. And when one is in full consciousness of Me by such
devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God.
The  conclusion  is  that  one  should  always  worship  Me  with  love  and  devotion.
Elevation  to  the  heavenly  planets  is  the  cause  of  material  happiness  and  attaining
liberation  is  the  negation  of  material  distress.  It  is  I  who  am  the  supreme  goal  of  the
jïänés and the means of attaining it as well.”
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is the object of worship for all the foremost philosophers of the
universe, such as the great sages, headed by Sanaka. Life’s goal, the means of attaining it,
and freedom from material desires are easily attained if one simply surrenders unto the
Supreme Lord. Those who renounce fruitive activities and mental speculation in order
to take shelter of devotional service are not interested in endeavoring for any other goal
of life.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Perfection of Spiritual Knowledge
jïäna-vijïäna-saàsiddhäù padaà çreñöhaà vidur mama
jïäné priyatamo ‘to me jïänenäsau bibharti mäm
Persons who have achieved perfection by means of philosophical and realized knowledge
know My lotus feet to be the supreme goal of life. Because such learned transcendentalists
are always engaged in trying to please Me, they are very dear to Me.
COMMENTARY
The  Lord  herein  establishes  the  truth  that  He  is  the  supreme  destination  for  all
learned  transcendentalists.  An  intelligent  person  knows  that  the  Lord’s  lotus  feet  are
the  ultimate  goal  of  life  and  not  the  impersonal  Brahman.  Those  who  are  topmost
transcendentalists  know  the  impersonal  Brahman  to  be  the  bodily  effulgence  of  the
lotus-eyed Supreme Lord. Such a person is certainly very dear to the Lord.
PURPORT
When  a  living  entity  is  fixed  in  self-realization  through  devotional  service  and  is
endowed  with  transcendental  knowledge  and  its  practical  application,  he  attains  the
perfection of life. Fortunate people serve the Supreme Lord by serving such a dear devotee.
This is the actual process for pleasing the Supreme Lord. Learned transcendentalists who
are always engaged in My devotional service are very dear to Me. Material knowledge, or
even knowledge of impersonal Brahman, is extremely insignificant. By the cultivation
of  such  knowledge,  one  attains  material  enjoyment  and  liberation,  but  this  is  not  the
ultimate goal of life.
tapas térthaà japo dänaà paviträëétaräëi ca
nälaà kurvanti täà siddhià yä jïäna-kalayä kåtä
The perfection one achieves by attaining even a small fraction of spiritual understanding
cannot  be  attained  by  performing  austerities,  chanting  mantras,  visiting  holy  places  of
pilgrimage, giving charity, or engaging in any other pious activity.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
404 Chapter 13
COMMENTARY
The word jïäna kalayä means “even a fraction of spiritual knowledge.”
PURPORT
The position one attains by engaging his purified senses in the service of the Supreme
Lord after realizing his constitutional position cannot be obtained by performing pious
activities,  undergoing  austerities,  visiting  holy  places,  chanting  mantras,  or  giving  in
charity.
tasmäj jïänena sahitaà jïätvä svätmänam uddhava
jïäna-vijïäna-sampanno bhaja mäà bhakti-bhävataù
Therefore,  My  dear  Uddhava,  you  should  realize  the  self  by  the  cultivation  of
transcendental knowledge. Then, with clear realization of spiritual knowledge, you should
worship Me with your heart saturated with love and devotion.
COMMENTARY
Çré  Kåñëa  says:  “Give  up  everything  else  and  simply  worship  Me.”  This  is  the
explanation of Çrédhara Svämé.
PURPORT
Realized knowledge enables one to perceive his original spiritual form. Every living
being  has  an  eternal  spiritual  identity,  which  remains  forgotten  until  revived  by  the
practice of devotional service to the Lord. Without at least a theoretical understanding
of  one’s  spiritual  self,  it  is  not  possible  to  advance  in  devotional  service  beyond  the
neophyte platform. The words  jïätvä svätmänam in this verse indicate that everyone
can realize his original spiritual identity and return to the eternal abode of the Lord.
jïäna-vijïäna-yajïena mäm iñövätmänam ätmani
sarva-yajïa-patià mäà vai saàsiddhià munayo ‘gaman
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Perfection of Spiritual Knowledge
In ancient times, great sages worshiped Me through the sacrifice of Vedic knowledge
and spiritual enlightenment, knowing Me to be the Supreme Lord of all sacrifice and the
Supersoul in everyone’s heart. As a result, these sages achieved the supreme perfection of
attaining My eternal abode.
COMMENTARY
One  may  question,  “Who  possesses  real  knowledge  and  understands  how  to
practically apply that knowledge?” In reply, Çré Kåñëa said: By engaging in the sacrifice
of  cultivating  transcendental  knowledge,  the  sages  of  bygone  age  had  worshiped  Me
as the Lord within their hearts. They worshiped Me as the Supersoul, the Lord of all
sacrifices, and thus achieved the perfection of life.
PURPORT
Being  covered  by  gross  and  subtle  designations,  the  conditioned  soul  forgets  his
actual identity. When one renounces his conditional state of existence by engagement
in the devotional service of the Lord, one comes to the understanding that the Supreme
Lord is the only object worthy of worship. By thus worshiping the Lord in full knowledge
of the self, the sages of ancient times had attained the supreme abode of the Lord.
tvayy uddhaväçrayati yas tri-vidho vikäro
mäyäntaräpatati nädy-apavargayor yat
janmädayo ‘sya yad amé tava tasya kià syur
ädy-antayor yad asato ‘sti tad eva madhye
My dear Uddhava, your eternal identity is covered by the material body and mind,
which are transformations of the three modes of material nature. Although they appear
very real at present, they are illusory because they have no eternal existence. How can the
various stages of the body, beginning with birth, have any relationship with your eternal
self? The material body is constantly changing, and it will cease to exist, just as it had not
existed before. The body must be understood as only a temporary manifestation of the
illusory energy of the Lord.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
406 Chapter 13
COMMENTARY
“By coming to the platform of realized knowledge, the jïänés achieve the ultimate
goal  of  life  and  yet,  they  remain  far  from  attaining  Me.  My  dear  Uddhava,  one  who
understands My nature will easily cross beyond the spell of nescience.” This instruction
of  the  Lord  is  not  only  meant  for  Uddhava  but  for  everyone.  The  transformations  of
the material body, which are born of the three material modes of nature, have nothing
to  do  with  the  pure  spirit  soul.  The  spell  of  illusion  that  causes  one  to  identify  with
the  temporary  material  body  was  not  there  in  the  beginning,  nor  will  it  remain  after
liberation from conditional life. The living entity is completely spiritual but at present
he  identifies  with  his  mundane  form,  which  is  temporarily  manifested.  For  the  spirit
soul, there is no birth and death. Under illusion, he thinks, “Now I am alive, later on I
will be dead, sometimes I am happy and sometimes I am miserable. The soul has nothing
to  do  with  the  transformations  of  the  material  body  and  when  one  is  enlightened  by
spiritual knowledge, his relationship with the material body is terminated. Actually, the
soul is distinct from the material body although he temporarily identifies himself with
it. The example is given that a man walking in the forest may see a rope but consider
it to be a snake. Such perception is mäyä, or illusion, although the rope actually exists
and a snake also exists in another place. Illusion thus refers to the false identification
of one object with another. It is only due to ignorance that the living entities come in
contact with mäyä, or illusion. If his conditional state were eternal, then it would be his
constitutional position and would not be dispelled by the attainment of transcendental
knowledge. Saintly persons do not approve of that conception of liberation whereby one
loses his individuality.
PURPORT
One cannot realize the Absolute Truth as long as he misidentifies with the gross and
subtle bodies. The gross body and the subtle mind are by nature continuously changing,
being under the influence of the three modes of material nature. The pure spirit soul,
however, is not subjected to any change or transformation. Eternity and temporality do
not go side by side.
For example, the illusion of accepting a rope as a snake is temporary. The rope is real
and the snake is real but the act of mistaking a rope for a snake is illusion. When the
understanding of the rope’s presence is awakened, at that very moment, the temporary
misconception of it being a snake is automatically dispelled. Knowledge of the eternal,
which is without beginning or end is distinct from all kinds of temporary conceptions.
The  conclusion  is  that  it  is  not  desirable  to  praise  the  material  body  and  mind  while
neglecting the spirit soul.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Perfection of Spiritual Knowledge
Spirit and matter are not one and the same. With their perverted understanding,
the Mäyävädés consider the Lord’s variegated spiritual pastimes to be on the level of the
mundane activities that are visible in this world. This mistake is caused by thinking of
the  self  merely  in  terms  of  negating  material  qualities.  Actually,  such  a  conception  is
sheer madness born of forgetfulness of the self.
It is necessary to become freed from the control of eternal time, which has created
a  perverted  form  of  the  eternally  present,  causing  the  conditioned  souls  to  see  things
in terms of past, present, and future. Even while living in the material world, one can
absorb himself in the eternal nature by replacing the spirit of enjoyment with the spirit
of service. The conclusion is that it is always profitable to give up the service of mäyä by
continually worshiping Lord Hari.
´Î3{H 3HÌ=
çré-uddhava uväca
jïänaà viçuddhaà vipulaà yathaitad vairägya-vijïäna-yutaà puräëam
äkhyähi viçveçvara viçva-mürte tvad-bhakti-yogaà ca mahad-vimågyam
Çré Uddhava said: O Lord of the universe! O form of the universe! Please describe the
perfect eternal knowledge that results in detachment from all that is material and awards
one direct perception of reality. This highly sought after knowledge describes devotional
service unto You.
COMMENTARY
Not  being  satisfied  with  the  knowledge  of  self-realization  that  the  Lord  had
presented  so  far,  Çré  Uddhava  now  inquires  about  the  rarely  understood  process  of
devotional service. The Absolute Truth is beyond the reach of the empiric philosophers.
Çré Uddhava said: “O Lord of the universe! The universal form and its opulence that
You manifest are temporary and therefore illusory. Now, kindly tell me about the pure
and unadulterated process of devotional service that is sought after by great sages, such
as Çuka and Sanaka.”
PURPORT
Those  who  have  been  able  to  lift  themselves  above  the  illusion  of  material
existence  are  called  mahat,  or  very  great  personalities.  Here,  Çré  Uddhava
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
408 Chapter 13
expresses his desire to hear about that knowledge which has been sought after by
such great personalities.
täpa-trayeëäbhihatasya ghore santapyamänasya bhavädhvanéça
paçyämi nänyac charaëaà taväìghri-dvandvätapaträd amåtäbhivarñät
My dear Lord, one who is caught up in the vicious cycle of repeated birth and death
and thus suffers the threefold miseries of material existence—for him the only shelter is
Your lotus feet, which are like an umbrella that showers nectar.
COMMENTARY
One  might  question,  “Being  satisfied  with  spiritual  knowledge,  what  would  one
gain  by  inquiring  about  the  process  of  devotional  service?”  Herein,  Lord  Kåñëa  gives
a suitable reply. The lotus feet of the Supreme Lord are most pleasing to the heart and
they shower nectar upon the devotee. This nectar is more relishable and sweet than the
happiness derived from Brahman realization. The lotus feet of the Lord are just like an
umbrella that shades one on the torturous path of material existence. Indeed, there is
no other comparable shelter available in this world. Çré Dhruva Mahäräja presented this
statement, which is found in the Çrémad Bhägavatam (4.9.10):
yä nirvåtis tanu-bhåtäà tava päda-padma-
dhyänäd bhavaj-jana-kathä-çravaëena vä syät
sä brahmaëi sva-mahimany api nätha mä bhüt
kià tv antakäsi-lulität patatäà vimänät
My Lord, the transcendental bliss derived from meditating upon Your lotus
feet or hearing about Your glories from pure devotees is so unlimited that it is
far  beyond  the  stage  of  brahmänanda,  wherein  one  thinks  himself  merged  in
the impersonal Brahman as one with the Supreme. Since brahmänanda is also
defeated by the transcendental bliss derived from devotional service, then what to
speak of the temporary blissfulness of elevating oneself to the heavenly planets,
which is ended by the separating sword of time? Although one may be elevated to
the heavenly planets, he falls down in due course of time.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Perfection of Spiritual Knowledge
In this verse, Çré Uddhava is inquiring about the most blissful process of devotional
service, which is more relishable than the happiness derived from Brahman realization
which is attained by the cultivation of knowledge.
PURPORT
This formidable material existence is filled with threefold miseries. Those who are
traversing the path of material existence are constantly afflicted by these miseries. The
lotus feet of the Supreme Lord protect the devotees from the scorching heat of aversion
to His devotional service, just like the cooling shade of an umbrella.
dañöaà janaà sampatitaà bile ‘smin kälähinä kñudra-sukhoru-tarñam
samuddharainaà kåpayäpavargyair vacobhir äsiïca mahänubhäva
My  dear  Lord,  please  mercifully  deliver  this  miserable  living  being  who  has  fallen
into the dark well of material existence and has thus being bitten by the snake of time. In
spite of a horrible condition of life, the miserable conditioned soul is mad after attaining
insignificant sense gratification. Please deliver me by Your nectarean instructions, which
bring one to the path of liberation.
COMMENTARY
One  should  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  the  pure  devotees  of  the  Lord  to  make  his
life perfect. There is no necessity for cultivating knowledge that is simply a negation of
material variegatedness in the hopes of attaining realization of Brahman. Even if one
is not a pure or exalted devotee, he should sincerely pray for the mercy of the Supreme
Lord. Without the mercy of the Supreme Lord, or His eternal servants, one’s personal
endeavors for liberation will yield no fruit. If one’s cultivation of knowledge is free from
desire  for  personal  gain  and  is  aimed  at  understanding  the  Absolute  Personality  of
Godhead,  it  becomes  fruitful.  Those  who  have  not  yet  attained  the  platform  of  pure
devotional service may acquire such knowledge in order to free themselves from material
bondage. The Lord’s mercy is practically manifest by the instructions He gives, such as
in the Bhagavad-gétä and Uddhava-gétä. In this verse, Uddhava prays to be bathed in
the shower of the Lord’s nectarean instructions. This is the purport of this verse.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
410 Chapter 13
PURPORT
Here,  the  true  condition  of  material  existence  is  being  described.  Although  the
happiness  one  gains  from  sense  gratification  is  very  insignificant,  the  condition  soul
has an insatiable desire to enjoy it. This mad desire to enjoy the dull material world is
certainly  due  to  the  influence  of  the  illusory  energy  of  the  Lord.  Instead  of  enjoying
the  happiness  he  desires,  the  conditioned  souls  continually  suffer  in  the  dark  well  of
material existence. It is in the  best interest of everyone to renounce the false prestige
based upon bodily identification and beg for the mercy of the Supreme Lord. The Lord
is  not  a  dead  stone  and  so  He  hears  the  sincere  appeals  of  the  conditioned  souls  and
mercifully helps them by His divine instructions.
çré-bhagavän uväca
ittham etat purä raja bhéñmaà dharma-bhåtäà varam
ajäta-çatruù papraccha sarveñäà no ‘nuçåëvatäm
The  Supreme  Lord  said:  My  dear  Uddhava,  formerly,  King  Yudhiñöhira,  who
considered no one as his enemy, inquired just as you have now, from the great authority
on religious principles, Bhéñma, while We were present.
nivåtte bhärate yuddhe suhån-nidhana-vihvalaù
çrutvä dharmän bahün paçcän mokña-dharmän apåcchata
At  the  end  of  the  battle  at  Kurukñetra,  King  Yudhiñöhira  was  afflicted  with  grief
because  of  the  death  of  so  many  well-wishers  and  relatives  and  thus,  after  listening  to
many discussions of religious principles, he finally asked the same question regarding the
path of liberation.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Perfection of Spiritual Knowledge
tän ahaà te ‘bhidhäsyämi deva-vrata-makhäc chrutän
jïäna-vairägya-vijïäna- çraddhä-bhakty-upabåàhitän
Now I will describe to you the religious principles governing Vedic knowledge, self-
realization,  renunciation,  faith,  and  devotional  service,  which  were  heard  directly  from
the mouth of Bhéñma.
navaikädaça païca trén bhävän bhüteñu yena vai
ékñetäthäikam apy eñu taj jïänaà mama niçcitam
I  approve  of  the  various  philosophical  understanding  that  delineate  a  combination
of nine, eleven, five, or three elements in all living entities, and ultimately one supreme
element within all twenty-eight.
COMMENTARY
The  knowledge  by  which  one  understands  the  twenty-eight  elements  comprising
material  nature—the  spirit  soul,  mahat-tattva,  false  ego,  five  sense  objects,  eleven
senses,  five  material  elements,  and  three  modes  of  material  nature—to  be  ultimately
nondifferent  from  the  Personality  of  Godhead  is  approved  by  Çré  Kåñëa.  Actual
knowledge is to understand that the Supersoul is the cause of all causes and thus the
origin of these twenty-eight elements.
PURPORT
The  nine  elements  mentioned  here  are  material  nature,  the  living  entity,  the
mahat-tattva,  false  ego,  and  the  five  objects  of  the  senses—sound,  touch,  form,  taste
and  aroma.  The  eleven  elements  mentioned  in  this  verse  are  the  five  working  senses
(speech,  hands,  legs,  anus,  and  genitals),  five  knowledge-acquiring  senses  (ears,  touch,
eyes,  tongue,  and  nostrils),  and  the  mind.  The  five  elements  are  earth,  water,  fire,  air
and ether, and the three elements are the three modes of material nature—goodness,
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
412 Chapter 13
passion, and ignorance. All of the living entities in this material world are embodied by
these  twenty-eight  elements.  The  one  supreme  element  within  all  twenty-eight  is  the
all-pervading Supersoul.
etad eva hi vijïänaà na tathaikena yena yat
sthity-utpatty-apyayän paçyed bhävänäà tri-guëätmanäm
When  one  no  longer  sees  the  twenty-eight  material  elements,  but  rather  sees  the
Supersoul, from whom these elements have emanated, his understanding is called vijï äna,
or  self-realization.  Every  materially  created  form  transforms  in  three  stages—  birth,
existence, and destruction.
COMMENTARY
In this verse, Çré Kåñëa describes vijïäna, which is the mature stage of jïäna. On the
platform of jïäna, one sees the material elements in relation to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead but on the platform of vijïäna, the Supersoul is directly realized in His own
abode. Upon realization of the Supersoul, who exists beyond this cosmic manifestation,
one  ceases  to  study  the  material  elements.  This  is  the  culmination  of  self-realization.
The objects of this material world are created by the three modes of material nature, and
are subjected to three phases. They come into being, remain for some time, and then
are ultimately dissolved. Therefore the creation, maintenance, and annihilation of the
cosmic  manifestation  is  a  temporary  manifestation  of  the  Lord’s  inferior  potency  and
not ultimate reality. Those who are wise realize this on the platform of vijïäna.
ädäv ante ca madhye ca såjyät såjyaà yad anviyät
punas tat-pratisaìkräme yac chiñyeta tad eva sat
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Perfection of Spiritual Knowledge
Creation,  maintenance,  and  destruction  are  the  stages  of  material  causation.  That
which consistently accompanies all these material phases from one creation to another and
remains alone when all material phases are annihilated is called sat, or eternal existence.
COMMENTARY
In this verse, the Supersoul, the original cause, is being further described. Although
all  created  things  can  be  understood  in  terms  of  cause  and  effect,  and  are  temporary
manifestations having a beginning, a period of manifestation, and an end, the original
cause is eternal and remains even after the total annihilation of the cosmic manifestation.
The mahat-tattva is considered to be the cause of the creation but it is not the cause
of  all  causes.  The  Supreme  Lord  is  the  absolute  cause  of  material  existence.  He  is
the  unchanging  reality  that  eternally  exists  while  everything  material  goes  through
constant transformations. This can be understood by one who cultivates transcendental
knowledge under the guidance of the bona fide spiritual master.
PURPORT
One’s understanding that the Absolute Truth is one without a second should not be
disturbed when one hears of the variegated pastimes of the Supreme Lord. When one
is on the platform of vijïäna, one’s resolute conviction that the Absolute Truth is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead remains unshakable.
Advaya  jïäna  does  not  refer  to  impersonal  monism,  a  conception  that  views  the
Absolute  Truth  as  being  devoid  of  variegatedness.  According  to  such  impersonal
philosophy,  the  individuality  of  the  living  entity,  the  distinction  between  the  master
and  the  servant,  and  their  transcendental  characteristics  are  products  of  illusion.  If
a  conditioned  soul  cannot  appreciate  the  philosophy  of  inconceivable  simultaneous
oneness and distinction, he will certainly come under the spell of Mäyäväda philosophy
and  therefore  consider  the  temporary  material  world,  which  is  a  manifestation  of  the
three modes of material nature, to be false.
Whatever we see manifested in this world has a beginning and an end. Although
the cosmic manifestation is in constant flux, the separated material energy of the Lord
is eternal and therefore not false. One who stands on the platform of realization of his
eternal self can, on the strength of his acquired knowledge, renounce both the aspiration
for material enjoyment, which is, after all, accompanied by so many miseries, as well as
dry renunciation of such enjoyment.
If one’s variegated activities pertaining to life in this material world are dovetailed
in the service of Lord Kåñëa, one will become purified of the contamination of aversion
to  the  Lord.  This  temporary  material  world,  which  covers  an  insignificant  portion  of
the  spiritual  sky,  can  be  realized  as  a  place  of  blissful  pastimes  of  the  Lord,  but  the
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
414 Chapter 13
moment one sees this world as separate from the Lord and thus meant for one’s personal
enjoyment, one’s advaya jïäna becomes disturbed.
The devotees of the Supreme Lord are very conversant with the understanding of
how everything in this world has a beginning and an end and so they cannot be diverted
due to attraction for momentary enjoyment. As long as the devotees are fully engaged in
the service of the Supreme Lord with all of their senses, material contamination cannot
touch them. However, when one fails to come to the platform of seeing how everything
is in relation to Kåñëa, one may adopt a process of pseudo renunciation.
çrutiù pratyakñam aitihyam anumänaà catuñöayam
pramäëeñv anavasthänäd vikalpät sa virajyate
From the four types of evidence—Vedic oral reception, direct experience, traditional
wisdom, and logical induction—one can understand the temporary nature of the material
world, and thus become detached from the dualities of material existence.
COMMENTARY
After  describing  jïäna  and  vijïäna,  Çré  Kåñëa  now  discusses  renunciation  in
this  and  the  following  verses.  The  evidence  presented  by  Vedic  oral  reception  is  that
the  Absolute  Truth  is  He  from  whom  all  living  entities  manifest,  by  whom  they  are
maintained for some time, and into whom they enter at the time of annihilation. The
evidence of direct perception is that a pot is made from earth and when it is broken,
there will remain only clay. The evidence presented by historical or traditional wisdom
is that those who declare that this material world is false did not exist previously, and
thus  are  unauthorized  and  ignorant.  The  evidence  of  hypothesis  is  to  conclude  that
this  material  world  is  temporary  because  it  has  a  beginning  and  an  end.  Although
there is sometimes disagreement between the four types of evidence, they all proclaim
that  material  existence  is  temporary  and  therefore,  one  should  develop  vairägya,  or
detachment, as stated here.
PURPORT
Unless  one  accepts  direct  perception,  Vedic  knowledge,  traditional  wisdom,  and
logical  induction  in  relation  to  the  Supreme  Lord,  one  will  simply  engage  in  mental
speculation  while  trying  to  understand  the  Absolute  Truth.  When  any  of  these  four
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Perfection of Spiritual Knowledge
kinds of evidence enhance one’s spiritual cultivation, they are accepted as being worthy.
Simply by utilizing any of these forms of evidence for one’s personal sense gratification,
one cannot attain auspiciousness. By renouncing objects that could be seen in relation to
Lord Hari, one invites inauspiciousness under the banner of false renunciation. However,
when one cultivates the understanding that everything can be properly utilized in the
devotional service of the Lord, that is considered suitable renunciation.
karmaëäà pariëämitväd ä-viriïcyäd amaìgalam
vipaçcin naçvaraà paçyed adåñöam api dåñöa-vat
One who is actually intelligent should see how material nature is subject to constant
transformation,  so  that  even  in  the  highest  planet  in  the  material  world,  the  planet  of
Lord Brahmä, there is no secure position. One should understand that within the material
world, everything has a beginning and an end, just as his experience has shown him.
COMMENTARY
Although heavenly enjoyment is not experienced on this earth, it can be understood
that there is no real happiness there because life there is also filled with envy, lamentation,
and ultimately, death. Residence on any planet within the universe is the result of one’s
fruitive  activities.  The  results  of  karma  are  always  temporary  and  thus  an  intelligent
person  can  conclude  that  every  situation  within  the  material  world  is  temporary  and
thus fraught with various miseries.
PURPORT
The  demigods,  headed  by  Brahmä,  are  under  the  influence  of  the  three  modes
of material nature, and yet they are worshiped by those who follow the karma-käëòa
sections of the Vedas, and are thus a source of inauspiciousness. An intelligent person
can easily understand the temporary and faulty nature of life on planet earth, and he can
also conclude that life in the heavenly planets must be temporary and inauspicious.
The results of fruitive activities are not at all desirable for self-realized souls. Unless
one comes to this platform, one will continue to remain entangled in temporary fruitive
activities.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
416 Chapter 13
bhakti-yogaù puraivoktaù préyamäëäya te ‘nagha
punaç ca kathayiñyämi mad-bhakteù käraëaà paraà
O sinless Uddhava, because of your love for Me, I had previously explained to you
the process of devotional service. I will once again impart to you that sublime means for
attain My pure devotional service.
COMMENTARY
Being requested by Uddhava, Çré Kåñëa now begins His description of devotional
service.  Although  Uddhava  had  heard  about  many  aspects  of  human  civilization,
including  the  varëäçrama-dharma  system,  the  processes  of  distinguishing  between
matter and spirit, renunciation of sense gratification, and so forth, he still hankered to
hear specifically about pure devotional service to Lord Kåñëa, and the Lord thus begins
to discuss that subject.
TEXTS 20-24
raddhämåta-kathäyäà me çaçvan mad-anukértanam
pariniñöhä ca püjäyäà stutibhiù stavanaà mama
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Perfection of Spiritual Knowledge
ädaraù paricaryäyäà sarväìgair abhivandanam
mad-bhakta-püjäbhyadhikä sarva-bhüteñu man-matiù
mad-artheñv aìga-ceñöä ca vacasä mad-guëeraëam
mayy arpaëaà ca manasaù sarva-käma-vivarjanam
mad-arthe ‘rtha-parityägo bhogasya ca sukhasya ca
iñöaà dattaà hutaà japtaà mad-arthaà yad vrataà tapaù
evaà dharmair manuñyäëäm uddhavätma-nivedinäm
mayi saïjäyate bhaktiù ko ‘nyo ‘rtho ‘syävaçiñyate
Firm  faith  in  the  nectarean  narrations  of  My  pastimes,  constant  chanting  of  My
transcendental  glories,  great  attachment  for  My  worship  in  the  temple,  praising  Me  by
offering  beautiful  prayers,  great  respect  for  My  devotional  service,  offering  obeisances
with the entire body, rendering service to My devotees, seeing Me within the hearts of
all living entities, offering one’s bodily activities in My devotional service, describing My
transcendental qualities, offering one’s mind to Me, renunciation of all material desires,
donating  one’s  wealth  for  My  devotional  service,  giving  up  material  sense  gratification
and happiness derived from it, and performing all pious activities such as giving charity,
performing sacrifice, chanting mantras, and executing vows and austerities simply with
the  desire  to  attain  Me—these  constitute  actual  religious  principles  by  which  devotees
who have actually surrendered unto Me automatically develop love for Me. What other
purpose or goal could there be for such a devotee?
COMMENTARY
Discussions  about  Kåñëa  are  full  of  nectar.  Talks  of  Kåñëa’s  räsa-lélä  pastimes  are
the most nectarean and should be heard with utmost faith. The worship of His devotee
is  more  pleasing  to  Kåñëa  than  His  own  worship.  One  should  perform  all  his  bodily
activities, such as bathing and brushing his teeth, in relation to the service of the Lord.
One should glorify the qualities and pastimes of the Lord with songs and prayers. One
should give his hard-earned money to his spiritual master or the Vaiñëavas for arranging
festivals  of  Kåñëa  consciousness.  One  should  renounce  whatever  wealth  creates  an
obstacle  on  his  path  of  worshiping  the  Lord.  One  should  renounce  all  activities  of
material sense gratification, of which enjoying sex is the chief. One should also give up
all kinds of material happiness, such as that derived from excessive attachment to one’s
wife and children. One should feed rice cooked with ghee to the brähmaëa Vaiñëavas.
One  should  offer  oblations  of  sesame  seeds  mixed  with  ghee  into  the  sacrificial  fire
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
418 Chapter 13
while  chanting  viñëave  sväùa.  One  should  chant  the  holy  names  of  the  Lord  without
cessation. The austerity to be performed by devotees is to observe fasting on days such
as  Ekädaçé.  Hearing  discussions  of  the  Lord’s  nectarean  pastimes  is  the  ultimate  fruit
of  all  activities  for  a  devotee  who  is  free  from  all  material  desires.  Unlike  jïänés  who
give  up  their  sädhana  when  they  attain  perfection,  devotees  never  give  up  the  limbs
of  devotional  service,  beginning  with  hearing  and  chanting,  even  after  attaining
perfection. In the perfectional stage of Kåñëa consciousness, hearing and chanting about
the transcendental names, forms, qualities, and pastimes of the Lord are thousands of
times more relishable than in the neophyte stage.
PURPORT
Faith in the discussion of Hari is the only qualification for chanting the holy name
of the Lord. If one is attracted to mundane topics, then one’s spirit of material enjoyment
will increase. The more one faithfully listens to discussion of Hari, the less his taste for
material sense gratification will be manifest. If one gives up hearing and chanting topics
that are not related to Kåñëa and always engages in glorifying the Lord, he will attain
supreme auspiciousness. To hear and chant the glorification of Hari, worship the Lord,
submit one’s self to the Lord while offering Him prayers, offer obeisances to the Lord,
worship the Lord’s devotee with great care and attention, and consider all living entities
to be the servants of the Supreme Lord are some of the activities by which one can quickly
advance on the path of sädhana bhakti. If, while practicing sädhana bhakti, one offers
all his worldly and religious activities to the Lord, glorifies the transcendental qualities
of  Hari,  gives  up  activities  that  are  not  pleasing  to  the  Lord  and  thus  does  not  run
after sense gratification, performs sacrifice, observes vows, undergoes austerity, chants
mantras,  and  gives  in  charity,  then  gradually  he  will  develop  his  dormant  propensity
for performing unalloyed devotional service. If one’s activities are directed towards the
service of the Supreme Lord, one gets respite from the false sense of false proprietorship
that  binds  the  conditioned  soul.  Only  by  complete  surrender  unto  the  Supreme  Lord
can one attain the platform of pure devotional service.
yadätmany arpitaà cittaà çäntaà sattvopabåàhitam
dharmaà jïänaà sa vairägyam aiçvaryaà cäbhipadyate
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Perfection of Spiritual Knowledge
When one’s peaceful mind that is enriched by the mode of goodness is fixed on the
Supersoul, one attains religiosity, knowledge, renunciation, and opulence.
COMMENTARY
One might question, “What is lacking for one who is a pure devotee of the Lord?”
Çré  Kåñëa  answers  this  question  in  this  verse.  One  should  not  think  that  unalloyed
devotional service is a limb of jïäna. The devotional service that is seen as a limb of
jïäna is different from pure devotional service, which is untouched by any contamination
of  karma  and  jïäna.  One  who  desires  material  enjoyment  can  gradually  come  to  the
platform of pure devotional service and at the same time, receive the fulfillment of all
his desires. If one can fix his mind on the Supersoul, then as a result of his devotion, he
can achieve all desirable perfections of life.
PURPORT
When one faithfully cultivates pure devotional service to the Supreme Lord, symptoms
such  as  knowledge  of  the  Supreme  Lord  and  the  individual  spirit  soul,  detachment
from  all  that  is  not  related  to  Kåñëa,  dependence  on  the  mercy  of  the  Supreme  Lord,
steadiness of mind, and being firmly situated in the mode of pure goodness are observed
in his character.
yad arpitaà tad vikalpe indriyaiù paridhävati
rajas-valaà cäsan-niñöhaà cittaà viddhi viparyayam
When consciousness is fixed on the material body, family members, and other objects
of sense gratification, one passes his life chasing after material objects with the help of
the  senses.  Being  under  the  control  of  the  mode  of  passion,  one  becomes  dedicated  to
impermanent things and in this way, irreligion, ignorance, attachment, and wretchedness
predominate.
COMMENTARY
When  one’s  mind  contemplates  the  activities  of  the  material  body  and  household
affairs,  the  mode  of  passion  becomes  prominent  so  that  one  becomes  mad  after  sense
gratification, even to the extent of performing prohibited activities. The mind of such
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
420 Chapter 13
a  person  is  uncontrolled,  thus  becoming  the  cause  of  irreligiosity,  ignorance,  material
attachment, and tremendous suffering.
PURPORT
Those who do not avail themselves of the opportunity to serve the Supreme Lord,
being  overwhelmed  by  desires  to  enjoy  sense  gratification,  will  become  bound  by
attachment to temporary material objects, thus creating so many disturbances in their
life.
dharmo mad-bhakti-kåt prokto jïänaà caikätmya-darçanam
guëesv asaìgo vairägyam aiçvaryaà cäëimädayaù
The  scriptures  declare  that  real  religious  principles  are  those  that  lead  one  to
devotional service to Me, real knowledge is to see everything in relation to the Supersoul,
real detachment is total disinterest in the objects of material sense gratification,  and real
opulence is the eight mystic perfections, which includes aëimä-siddhi.
COMMENTARY
Real religion means devotional service to the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
The  Supreme  Lord  is  the  personification  of  knowledge.  Therefore,  one  who  has
been delivered from ignorance naturally engages in the devotional service of the Lord
and is considered thoroughly religious. One who is detached from the three modes of
material nature and the objects of sense gratification produced from them is considered
to be detached. The eight mystic powers that were previously described to Uddhava are
the ultimate attainments of material power and opulence.
TEXTS 28-32
´Î3{H 3HÌ=
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Perfection of Spiritual Knowledge
çré-uddhava uväca
yamaù kati-vidhaù prokto niyamo väri-karñaëa
kaù çamaù ko damaù kåñëa kä titikñä dhåtiù prabho
kià dänaà kià tapaù çauryaà kim satyam åtam ucyate
kas tyägaù kià dhanaà ceñöaà ko yajïaù kä ca dakñiëä
puàsaù kià svid balaà çréman bhago läbhaç ca keçava
kä vidyä hréù parä kä çréù kià sukhaà duùkham eva ca
kaù paëòitaù kaç ca mürkhaù kaù panthä utpathaç ca kaù
kaù svargo narakaù kaù svit ko bandhur uta kià gåham
ka äòhyaù ko daridro vä kåpaëaù kaù ka éçvaraù
etän praçnän mama brühi viparétäàç ca sat-pate
Çré Uddhava said: My dear Lord Kåñëa, O chastiser of the enemies, please tell me how
many types of disciplinary regulations and prohibitions there are. My Lord, please define
mental equilibrium, self-control, and the real meaning of tolerance and steadfastness. What
are charity, austerity, and heroism, and how can truth and reality be best described? What
is renunciation, and what is real wealth? What is desirable, what is sacrifice, and what
is religious remuneration? My dear Keçava, O most fortunate one, how can I understand
the strength, opulence, and merit of a particular person? What is the best education, what
is actual humility, and what is real beauty? What are happiness and unhappiness? Who
is learned, and who is a fool? What are the true and the false paths in life, and what are
heaven and hell? Who is indeed a true friend, and what is one’s real home? Who is a rich
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
422 Chapter 13
man, and who is a poor man? Who is wretched, and who is actually fortunate? O Lord of
the devotees, kindly explain these to me, along with their opposites.
COMMENTARY
After  hearing  about  various  kinds  of  religious  principles,  Çré  Uddhava  now  asks
Kåñëa  to  give  authoritative  definitions  of  the  of  yamas  and  niyamas  that  comprise
civilized life throughout the world. The word iñöa means “most desirable.” The word çré
means “opulence.” Uddhava also wants to hear from Kåñëa about that which is just the
opposite of civilized life.
TEXTS 33-35
çré-bhagavän uväca
ahiàsä satyam asteyam asaìgo hrér asaïcayaù
ästikyaà brahmacaryaà ca maunaà sthairyaà kñamäbhayam
çaucaà japas tapo homaù çraddhätithyaà mad-arcanam
térthäöanaà parärthehä tuñöir äcärya-sevanam
ete yamäù sa-niyamä ubhayor dvädaça småtäù
puàsäm upäsitäs täta yathä-kämaà duhanti hi
The  Supreme  Lord  said:  Nonviolence,  truthfulness,  not  usurping  others’  property,
detachment from worldly association, humility, freedom from possessiveness, faith in the
principles  of  religion,  celibacy,  silence,  steadiness,  forgiveness,  and  fearlessness—these
twelve  are  referred  to  as  yama.  External  cleanliness,  internal  cleanliness,  chanting  the
holy  names  of  the  Lord,  austerity,  fire  sacrifice,  faith,  serving  guests,  worshiping  Me,
visiting holy places, engaging only in activities that are ultimately beneficial, and service
to the spiritual master—these twelve are called niyama. My dear Uddhava, These twenty-
four practices bestow all desired benedictions upon those who devotedly cultivate them.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Perfection of Spiritual Knowledge
COMMENTARY
In these three verses, the Supreme Lord defines yama and niyama . There are two
types of purification—internal and external. By carefully cultivating these twenty-four
yama and niyama, all of one’s desires become fulfilled.
PURPORT
The  twelve  yamas  are  non-enviousness,  remaining  fixed  in  the  truth,  refraining
from  stealing  another’s  property,  staying  aloof  from  all  kinds  of  bad  association,
always attempting to do good to others, renunciation of unnecessary sense enjoyment,
unflinching faith in the Supreme Lord, celibacy, giving up idle talks, steadiness in one’s
practices,  tolerance  of  others’  offenses,  and  fear  of  transgressing  the  prescribed  rules
and regulations. The twelve niyamas are external cleanliness such as bathing, internal
cleanliness by serving Lord Hari, chanting the holy names of the Lord, observing vows
such  as  Ekädaçé,  performing  sacrifice  for  the  satisfaction  of  Lord  Hari,  maintaining
faith in the discussions of the glories of Lord Hari, serving the devotees of Lord Hari,
worshiping the Deity, traveling to holy places of pilgrimage, engaging in activities meant
for  one’s  ultimate  welfare,  remaining  fixed  in  observing  the  codes  of  proper  conduct,
being satisfied in all conditions of life, and serving the spiritual master.
TEXTS 36-39
çamo man-niñöhatä buddher dama indriya-saàyamaù
titikñä duùkha-sammarño jihvopastha-jayo dhåtiù
daëòa-nyäsaù paraà dänaà käma-tyägas tapaù småtam
svabhäva-vijayaù çauryaà satyaà ca sama-darçanam
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
424 Chapter 13
anyac ca sunåtä väëé kavibhiù parikértitä
karmasv asaìgamaù çaucaà  tyägaù sannyäsa ucyate
dharma iñöaà dhanaà nèëäà yajïo ‘haà bhagavattamaù
dakñiëä jïäna-sandeçaù präëäyämaù paraà balam
Full concentration of the mind on Me constitutes mental equilibrium and complete
control  of  the  senses  is  self-control.  Tolerance  means  patiently  enduring  distress,  and
steadfastness occurs when one controls the urges of the tongue and genitals. The greatest
charity is to give up all envy toward others, and renunciation of sense gratification is real
austerity. Real heroism is to conquer one’s natural tendency to enjoy material life, and
reality is seeing the Supreme Lord in everything and everything in the Supreme Lord.
Truthfulness means to speak honestly in a pleasing manner, as declared by great sages.
Cleanliness is attained by detachment from fruitive activities, and renunciation indicates
the sannyäsa order of life. The true desirable wealth for human beings is religiousness, and
I, the Supreme Lord, am the enjoyer of all sacrifices. Religious remuneration is devotion
for the spiritual master with the desire to acquire real knowledge, and the greatest strength
is the präëäyäma system of breath control.
COMMENTARY
Here,  the  Lord  defines  those  qualities  that  should  be  cultivated  by  all  who  desire
to advance toward the goal of human life. Çama means to fix the mind on Lord Kåñëa
because without Kåñëa consciousness, peacefulness of mind is simply emptyness. Dama
means to control the senses. One who wants to impart instructions to others without
himself  controlling  his  sense  will  certainly  be  mocked.  Tolerance  means  to  patiently
endure the insults of others, as well as all kinds of distress. It is simply an artificial show
if one performs some great austerity and yet is unwilling to tolerate the abuses of others.
Real steadfastness is achieved when one carefully controls his tongue and genitals. Real
charity is the renunciation of all kinds of violence toward others. If one contributes to
charities while at the same time exploiting others by engaging them in hellish factory
work—this is simply hypocrisy. Austerity means to forego all kinds of material comforts
while observing the prescribed vows, such as Ekädaçé. Real austerity is not torturning
the  body  just  to  achieve  name  and  fame.  Real  heroism  is  to  conquer  lust,  anger,  and
greed. If one can conquer these three enemies, he is a greater hero than one who simply
vanquishes his political enemies.
Equal  vision  can  be  exhibited  by  one  who  is  not  envious,  and  who  sees  how  the
Supersoul is present along with the individual soul within all types of bodies. This vision
is pleasing to the Supreme Lord, who then awards further advancement to the devotee.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Perfection of Spiritual Knowledge
Reality is only truly understood when one sees the spiritual equality of all living entities,
as confirmed by Çré Kåñëa in the Bhagavad-gétä 6.32:
ätmaupamyena sarvatra samaà paçyati yo ’rjuna
sukhaà vä yadi vä duùkhaà sa yogé paramo mataù
He is a perfect yogi who, by comparison to his own self, sees the true equality
of all beings, in both their happiness and their distress, O Arjuna!
One who is actually an advanced soul feels compassion upon experiencing the miseries
of the conditioned souls. Truthfulness means to present the facts clearly and not distort
the truth to avoid offending materialistic men. However, in the name of truthfulness,
one should not become a fault-finder. The truth should be spoken to elevate others to
the  spiritual  platform,  not  to  push  forward  one’s  limited  agenda.  Cleanliness  is  more
than regular bathing. As long as the mind is absorbed in thinking of sense gratification,
one  must  be  considered  contaminated,  even  if  has  taken  countless  baths.  Therefore,
real cleanliness is purification of the mind. Real renunciation involves detachment from
the  false  egoistic  conceptions  that  the  body  is  the  self,  and  everything  in  relation  to
the body is a possession. If, after giving up all one’s material possessions, one remains
attached to family members, that renunciation is only a show. Real wealth is to possess
the knowledge of self-realizations, and not just so much land and money. Sacrifice is one
of the names of the Lord and so one should not think that the performance of sacrifices
is meant for achieving temporary rewards. The best form of remuneration to the guru is
to render selfless service by distributing the knowledge one has received to others.
PURPORT
To fix one’s intelligence in the service of the Supreme Lord while renouncing the
natural  propensity  to  accept  and  reject  things  for  one’s  personal  sense  gratification  is
called çama. To restrain the senses from unrestrainedly enjoying their sense objects is
called dama. To tolerate the distress that one is destined to suffer, thinking it to be the
Lord’s mercy, and refraining from feelings of jealousy because of another’s happiness is
called titikñä. To abstain from all kinds of sense gratification, such as the relishing of
very  palatable  food,  is  called  steadfastness.  To  give  up  the  mentality  of  unnecessarily
punishing  one  for  his  faults  is  called  däna.  To  give  up  all  desire  for  material  sense
enjoyment despite having such facilities is called tapasyä. To subdue one’s natural thirst
for sense enjoyment is called çaurya. To see everything in relation to the Supreme Lord
is  called  samadarçana.  This  is  the  best  form  of  satya.  Speaking  simply  yet  boldly  is
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
426 Chapter 13
called åta. To remain detached from material enjoyment while utilizing everything in
the service of Kåñëa is called çauca. To refrain from enjoying the objects of the senses
is called sannyäsa. To follow religious principles is the most desirable form of dhana. To
serve  the  Supreme  Lord  is  actual  yajïa.  To  instruct  others  in  the  knowledge  of  one’s
relationship  with  the  Supreme  Lord  is  called  dakñina,  and  to  regulate  the  mind  by
breathing exercises is präëäyäma.
TEXTS 40-45
bhago ma aiçvaro bhävo läbho mad-bhaktir uttamaù
vidyätmani bhidä-bädho jugupsä hrér akarmasu
çrér guëä nairapekñyädyäù sukhaà duùkha-sukhätyayaù
duùkhaà käma-sukhäpekñä paëòito bandha-mokña-vit
mürkho dehädy-ahaà-buddhiù panthä man-nigamaù småtaù
utpathaç citta-vikñepaù svargaù sattva-guëodayaù
narakas tama-unnäho bandhur gurur ahaà sakhe
gåhaà çaréraà mänuñyaà guëäòhyo hy äòhya ucyate
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Perfection of Spiritual Knowledge
daridro yas tv asantuñöaù kåpaëo yo ‘jitendriyaù
guëeñv asakta-dhér éço guëa-saìgo viparyayaù
eta uddhava te praçnäù sarve sädhu nirüpitäù
kià varëitena bahunä lakñaëaà guëa-doñayoù
guëa-doña-dåçir doño guëas tübhaya-varjitaù
Actual opulence, or bhaga, is My own nature, in which I exhibit the six unlimited
opulences.  The  supreme  gain  of  life,  or  läbha,  is  devotional  service  unto  Me.  Actual
education, or vidyä, is to remove the conception of duality from the mind of the conditioned
soul.  Real  modesty,  or  hré,  is  to  be  disgusted  with  abominable  activities.  Real  beauty,
or çré, is to possess good qualities, such as detachment. Real happiness, or  sukha, is to
transcend material happiness and distress, whereas distress, or duùkha, is the constant
hankering for sex enjoyment. A learned man, or paëòita, is one who knows the process
of  liberation  from  material  bondage,  and  a  fool,  or  murkha,  is  one  who  identifies  with
his material body and mind. The real path, or satpatha, is that which ultimately leads to
Me, whereas the wrong path, or kupatha, is sense gratification, which simply bewilders
the mind. Heaven, or svarga, is the predominance of the mode of goodness and naraka,
or hell, is the predominance of the mode of ignorance. I am the true friend, or bandhu,
because I act as the spiritual master of the entire world. The body of the human being
is his gåha, or residence. One who is endowed with all good qualities is ädhya, or rich,
and one who is dissatisfied with life is daridra, or poor. A kåpaëa, or miser, is one who
cannot control his senses, whereas one who is detached from sense gratification is truly a
controller, or éça. One who is attached to sense gratification is just the opposite, or a slave.
My dear Uddhava, I have thus elucidated all of the matters about which you inquired.
There is no need for a more elaborate description of these good and bad qualities because
to  constantly  see  good  and  bad  is  itself  a  bad  quality.  The  best  quality  is  to  transcend
material good and evil.
COMMENTARY
Because compassion is recognized throughout the world as an exalted quality, the
Lord has not described it here. Actual bhaga, or opulence, is possessed by the supreme
controller.  The  controlling  power  of  the  living  entities  in  this  world,  or  even  the
demigods in heaven, cannot be considered real bhaga. Attainment of devotional service
to the Supreme Lord is one’s real asset, and not his children, home, and so on, which are
all subject to destruction. Real knowledge is that which enables one to see everything
in relation to the Supreme Lord, and not that which is acquired by an academic, such as
knowledge of grammar and so on. The word håé means to feel disgust at the mere thought
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
428 Chapter 13
of sinful activities, and not mere shyness. One’s good qualities are his real decoration,
and not the crown that sits on his head. One who is satisfied in Kåñëa consciousness and
thus does not seek material pleasure or suffer material unhappiness is considered to be
actually situated in happiness. The most wretched person is one addicted to sex pleasure,
and a wise man is one who knows the process of freedom from such material bondage.
A fool is one who gives up his eternal friendship with Lord Kåñëa and instead identifies
himself with his own temporary material body, mind, society, community, and family.
The real path is the path of devotional service that leads one to the Supreme Lord, and
not simply a footpath that has no stones or thorns. The path of sense gratification is the
wrong path because it simply leads one to utter confusion. Predominance of the mode of
goodness is real heaven, and not the abode of Indra, and predominance of the mode of
ignorance is hell. The spiritual master is the best friend who saves us from all danger and
he is non-different from Kåñëa, the spiritual master of the entire universe. Our material
body is our real home, and not a structure of bricks and cement. One who possesses all
good qualities is actually rich, and not a rascal with a big bank balance. A real lord is
one who has conquered material desires and ascended to the transcendental platform,
and not an aristocrat who engages in all sorts of abominable activities.
Thus being asked by Uddhava, Çré Kåñëa has nicely described the difference between
good  qualities  and  faults.  The  Lord  concludes  His  analysis  by  stating  that  there  is  no
need for further elaboration of these good and bad qualities. Indeed, the purpose of life
is to transcend materially good and bad qualities and come to the liberated platform of
pure Kåñëa consciousness.
PURPORT
The Lord is full of six opulences—wealth, strength, beauty, fame, knowledge, and
renunciation. The supreme accomplishment is when one engages in the service of the
Supreme  Lord.  To  remain  aloof  from  the  material  conception  of  life  is  fruit  of  actual
knowledge. To indulge in sinful activities unrestrictedly is the most wretched condition
of  life.  To  spontaneously  abhor  sinful  life  is  the  sign  of  true  modesty.  Good  qualities
are the actual wealth of the living entities. To give up the quest for sense gratification
and achieve satisfaction due to love for the Lord is real happiness. The lust for material
enjoyment produces limitless distress.
Possessing knowledge of how to free oneself from the bondage of material existence
is real learning. To identify one’s self as the gross and subtle material coverings is utter
foolishness. The true path of life is the one shown by the spiritual master who is coming
in  disciplic  succession  and  thus  authorized  by  the  Supreme  Lord.  The  wrong  path  is
a  life  of  sense  enjoyment,  which  simply  leads  to  the  bewilderment  of  one’s  mind.  A
predominance of the mode of goodness is real heaven and a predominance of the mode
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Perfection of Spiritual Knowledge
of ignorance is real hell. The Supreme Lord and the spiritual master, who is the eternal
servant  of  the  Lord,  are  one’s  real  friends.  The  material  body  is  one’s  actual  place  of
residence. One who possesses good qualities is actually rich and one who is dissatisfied
with  his  position,  which  is  the  result  of  his  previous  karma,  is  actually  poor.  Sense
enjoyers,  those  with  uncontrolled  minds  and  senses,  and  those  who  are  overwhelmed
by greed are truly misers. One whose intelligence is never swayed by the three modes
of material nature is a real controller. One who acts under the influence of the three
modes of material nature is controlled and dependent. To look for material qualities and
faults is itself a fault. While cultivating transcendental qualities, one should give up the
habit of finding fault in others.
Thus  ends  the  translation  of  the  thirteenth  chapter  of  the  Uddhava-géta  entitled
“The  Perfection  of  Spiritual  Knowledge”  with  the  commentaries  of  Çréla  Viçvanätha
Cakravarté  Öhäkura  and  chapter  summary  and  purports  of  Çréla  Bhaktisiddhänta
Sarasvaté Öhäkura.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 14
Pure devotIonaL servICe surPasses KnowLedge and detaChment
CHAPTER SUMMARY
This  chapter  describes  the  processes  of  karma-yoga,  jïäna-yoga,  and  bhakti-yoga,
according to the good and bad qualities that are found in various people.
The Vedic literature propagates true religion, which are the orders of the Supreme
Lord.  The  social  structure  that  is  put  forward  in  the  Vedic  literature  is  known  as
varëäçrama-dharma,  which  is  within  the  realm  of  material  duality.  In  other  places,
however, the Vedic literature advises one to rise above such a vision of duality. In this
chapter,  Uddhava  wants  this  point  to  be  cleared  up,  as  to  why  the  Vedic  literature
appears to support two contradictory positions. Just to reconcile these two conflicting
positions, Çré Kåñëa describes in this chapter the processes of karma-yoga, jïäna-yoga,
and  bhakti-yoga.  Karma-yoga  is  the  path  that  is  recommended  for  persons  who  are
filled with material desires. Jïäna-yoga is the path that is recommended for those who
want  to  retire  from  material  activities  for  the  purpose  of  understanding  the  Absolute
Truth. Bhakti-yoga is recommended for those who have understood that everything in
existence is owned and controlled by the Lord. As long as one desires to act fruitively,
and as long as one’s faith in the Supreme Lord has not matured, he should execute his
prescribed duties as outlined in the varëäçrama system
Those who faithfully perform their duties as prescribed by the varëäçrama system
of  social  organization,  carefully  avoiding  the  sinful  acts  that  are  forbidden  by  the
injunctions  of  the  scriptures,  will  gradually  rise  to  the  transcendental  platform  of
absolute knowledge. Generally, transcendentalists are first attracted to the impersonal
conception of the Absolute, but those who are very fortunate manifest devotion for the
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
432 Chapter 14
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  The  human  form  of  life  is  the  special  opportunity
awarded to the conditioned souls to awaken their dormant spiritual awareness, and as
such,  such  a  human  birth  is  even  desired  by  the  demigods  of  heaven.  Although  it  is
temporary like all other forms of life, the human body can enable one to achieve life’s
ultimate goal. For that reason, one who is intelligent will endeavor to gain release from
the vicious cycle of birth and death before death arrives at his doorstep. The human body
is compared to a boat, the spiritual master is the captain of  the ship, and the injunctions
of  the  scriptures  are  the  favorable  breezes  that  can  carry  one  to  his  destination.  One
who has attained the human form of life and yet does not endeavor to cross over the
ocean of material existence must be considered the killer of his own self. The mind is
very restless and the senses always demand satisfaction. Therefore, by good intelligence,
one should control his mind and senses by cultivation of the mode of goodness.
To help fix the mind in transcendence, one should meditate upon the creation of
the universe from subtle to gross. Then, one should meditate upon the dissolution of the
universe from gross to subtle. One who has understood the futility of material existence
can remain detached from the objects of the senses and bodily identification by carefully
putting  into  practice  the  instructions  of  the  spiritual  master.  The  three  processes  of
eight-fold mystic yoga, the cultivation of transcendental knowledge, and the devotional
service of the Lord can all enable one to remain fixed on the spiritual platform.
One  should  remained  fixed  in  the  determination  to  carry  out  one’s  prescribed
duties. By carefully studying the scriptures, which detail exactly what is desirable and
what  is  to  be  avoided  in  this  world,  one  can  elevate  himself  above  the  vicious  modes
of  passion  and  ignorance.  By  directly  engaging  in  the  devotional  service  of  the  Lord,
all  kinds  of  perfection  are  easily  achieved.  Anyone  who  is  always  engaged  in  the
service  of  the  Supreme  Lord  will  gradually  lose  his  taste  for  the  inferior  engagements
of  sense  gratification.  Ultimately,  when  one  directly  perceives  the  Supreme  Lord,  his
false ego is vanquished, all doubts are destroyed, and all the results of fruitive activities
are burned to ashes. Thus, the devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead never
make a separate endeavor to perform austerities, or other such similar process. In pure
devotional  service,  there  is  no  question  of  piety  or  sin,  because  the  unalloyed  bhakta
has reached the transcendental platform, where the injunctions and prohibitions of the
Vedas no longer apply.
´Î3{H 3HÌ=
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Pure Devotional Service Surpasses Knowledge and Detachment
çré-uddhava uväca
vidhiç ca pratiñedhaç ca nigamo héçvarasya te
avekñate ‘raviëòäkña guëaà doñaà ca karmaëäm
Çré Uddhava said: My dear lotus-eyed Lord, the Vedic literature, which constitutes
Your divine orders in terms of positive and negative injunctions, focuses on the good and
bad qualities of work.
COMMENTARY
In this chapter, jïäna, karma, and bhakti are elaborately described, as well as those
who are suitable to engage in these three processes.
PURPORT
The  activities  of  the  living  entities  who  are  averse  to  the  service  of  the  Supreme
Lord can be divided into two categories. Some good and bad qualities are always found
in  such  activities.  The  prescriptions  given  by  the  Supreme  Lord  are  termed  vidhi,  or
rules, and are always considered good. The prohibitions declared by the Supreme Lord
are termed niñedha, or regulations, and they are always considered faulty.
varëäçrama-vikalpaà ca pratilomänulomajam
dravya-deça-vayaù-kälän svargaà narakam eva ca
The  Vedic  literature  creates  the  divisions  of  varëa  and  äçrama,  and  describes  the
good  and  bad  qualities  in  relation  to  mixed  marriages,  called  pratiloma and anuloma,
according  to  time,  ingredients,  place,  and  age.  The  Vedas  also  reveal  the  existence  of
heaven and hell, which are certainly the products of piety and sin.
COMMENTARY
It  was  previously  stated  that  pointing  out  good  and  bad  qualities  of  others  is  in
itself  a  fault  and  so  one  should  give  up  such  a  dualistic  mentality.  In  the  following
five  verses,  Çré  Uddhava  expresses  his  desire  to  know  more  about  this  from  the  Lord.
Uddhava  said:  My  dear  Lord,  the  Vedic  literature  contains  Your  instructions  and
consists of recommendations and prohibitions. The performance of prescribed duties is
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
434 Chapter 14
always beneficial and the performing of prohibited acts is always faulty. Good and bad
qualities,  piety  and  impiety,  and  heaven  and  hell  are  born  of  such  recommendations
and  prohibitions.  In  the  social  system  of  varëa  and  äçrama,  there  are  good  qualities
and faults that are judged in terms of the various kinds of marriage. If a man marries
a girl of a superior varëa, then the union is termed pratiloma. If a man marries a girl
belonging to an inferior varëa, that union is termed anuloma. In any case, the entire
Vedic social system is based on distinguishing between piety and sin, and Çré Uddhava
is  encouraging  the  Lord  to  explain  more  elaborately  His  statement  that  one  should
transcend both piety and sin.
PURPORT
Divisions of varëa, divisions of äçrama, divisions according to the nature of one’s
birth, various objects and places, and the existence of heaven and hell, are all the results
of piety and sin.
guëa-doña-bhidä-dåñöim antareëa vacas tava
niùçreyasaà kathaà nèëäà niñedha-vidhi-lakñaëam
Without differentiating between pious and sinful acts, how can one understand Your
instructions in the form of the Vedic literature, which orders one to act piously and forbid
one to act sinfully? Without such authorized Vedic instructions, which ultimately award
liberation, how could human beings achieve the perfection of life?
COMMENTARY
All  recommendations  and  prohibitions  are  presented  in  the  Vedic  literature  as
instructions of the Supreme Lord. In order to advance toward the perfection of life, one
must discriminate between good qualities and faults. Anything prescribed by the Lord
is a good quality, and anything prohibited by Him is a fault. Therefore, it is impossible
to  achieve  any  auspiciousness  in  this  life  without  making  a  distinction  between  good
qualities and faults.
PURPORT
Uddhava  is  pointing  out  that  if  a  person  has  no  interest  in  making  a  distinction
between piety and sin, then it becomes impossible for him to properly understand the
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
scriptures.  Without  the  assistance  of  the  scriptures,  how  can  a  human  being  hope  to
understand the Absolute Truth, or be liberated from material existence?
itå-deva-manuñyänäà vedaç cakñus taveçvara
çreyas tv anupalabdhe ‘rthe sädhya-sädhanayor api
My dear Lord, Vedic literature in the form of Your orders is the best evidence for
understanding  things  beyond  our  experience,  such  as  liberation,  the  attainment  of  the
heavenly planets, and knowledge of the ultimate goal of life. For this reason, it is imperative
that the forefathers, demigods, and human beings consult the Vedic literature.
COMMENTARY
Vedic injunctions are not only beneficial for human beings, but also for the demigods
and forefathers. The best way of seeing things in the right perspective is to see through
the eyes of the Vedic literature, which consists of the instructions of the Supreme Lord.
Vedic literature is the original source of all kinds of knowledge. One can learn about
liberation, the heavenly planets, and the ultimate goal of life, as well as the process for
achieving the goal of life, only from the Vedic literature.
PURPORT
Human beings, demigods, and forefathers can see everything in the right perspective,
and learn about sädhya and the processes of sädhana by seeing through the eyes of the
scriptures, which are the Supreme Lord’s orders. All living entities, be they forefathers,
demigods, or human beings, are directed by the orders of the Supreme Lord.
guëa-doña-bhidä-dåñöir nigamät te na hi svataù
nigamenäpavädaç ca bhidäyä iti ha bhramaù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
436 Chapter 14
My dear Lord, the distinction between piety and sin comes from Vedic knowledge,
which emanates from You, and does not arise by itself. If it is seen that the same Vedas
discredit attempts to distinguish between piety and sin, then surely there will be chaos.
COMMENTARY
A dilemma has apparently been created by the Vedic literature. The Vedas, which
consist  of  the  Lord’s  orders  advise  one  to  discriminate  between  good  and  bad.  At  the
same  time,  it  sometimes  forbids  us  to  make  such  distinctions.  Therefore,  Uddhava  is
confused  about  what  is  right  and  what  is  wrong  and  he  prays  to  Kåñëa  to  remove  his
doubt.
PURPORT
Because the Vedic statements that one should discriminate between good and bad,
and  other  statements  that  one  should  give  up  such  a  vision  of  duality,  are  seemingly
contradictory,  Çré  Uddhava  is  herein  enacting  the  pastime  of  a  bewildered  person  by
asking the Lord to resolve this apparent contradiction.
çré-bhagavän uväca
yogäs trayo mayä proktä nèëäà çreyo-vidhitsayä
jïänaà karma ca bhaktiç ca nopäyo ‘nyo ‘sti kutracit
The  Supreme  Lord  said:  My  dear  Uddhava,  because  I  desire  ultimate  welfare  for
human  beings,  I  created  three  kinds  of  yoga,  or  paths  of  advancement—jï äna-yoga,
karma-yoga, and bhakti-yoga. Besides these three, there is no other means of elevation.
COMMENTARY
Although  all  the  processes  that  are  recommended  in  the  scriptures  lead  one  to
Kåñëa consciousness, it should be understood that people accept varieties of paths due
to their particular inclinations and propensities. Here, Lord Kåñëa describes the three
paths  of  spiritual  advancement,  just  to  show  that  the  ultimate  goal  is  one.  The  three
methods for advancement have been described in the karma-käëòa, jïäna-käëòa, and
upäsaëa-käëòa sections of the Vedas. Whatever path one may follow, success depends
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
upon the mercy of the Lord. Indeed, no progress in any endeavor can be made without
the sanction of the Lord. It should be noted that the other Vedic prescriptions, such as
the performance of austerity and the giving of charity, are contained within these three
general processes. By the word traya, the Lord emphasizes that the fruitive activities of
the karmés and the mental speculation of the jïänés are inferior to the surrender of the
pure devotees who are engaged in bhakti-yoga.
PURPORT
The  processes  of  karma,  jïäna,  and  bhakti,  have  been  described  in  the  Vedic
literature for the ultimate benefit of all human beings. Apart from engagement in these
processes, there is no other way for a human being to achieve auspiciousness.
nirviëëänäà jïäna-yogo nyäsinäm iha karmasu
teñv anirviëëa-cittänäà karma-yogas tu käminäm
Jï äna-yoga is recommended for those who have seen the futility of material existence,
and thus want to become detached from fruitive activities. Karma-yoga is recommended
for those who are fond of sense gratification, failing to understand the great distress that
accompanies fruitive work.
COMMENTARY
Here  is  a  description  of  the  various  propensities  that  cause  a  person  to  accept  a
particular  path  of  elevation.  Those  who  have  become  thoroughly  disgusted  with  the
animal  propensities  of  eating,  sleeping,  mating,  and  defending,  and  thus  are  not  even
interested in enjoying these things in heaven, take to the cultivation of transcendental
knowledge. Those who are still very eager to enjoy a materialistic life, centered around
friends  and  family,  and  who  are  attached  to  the  flowery  words  of  the  Vedas  that
recommend  promotion  to  the  heavenly  planets  for  superior  sense  gratification,  are
not fit to take to the arduous path of philosophical speculation. Materialistic men are
advised to remain in family life and offer the fruits of their labor to the Supreme Lord.
In this way, they can gradually attain perfection, which is dependent  upon knowledge
and detachment.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
438 Chapter 14
PURPORT
Jïäna-yoga has been prescribed for those who have become detached from worldly
enjoyment, and karma-yoga has been recommended for those who are attached to the
fruits of their work, being driven by the spirit of enjoyment.
yadåcchayä mat-kathädau jäta-çraddhas tu yaù pumän
na nirviëëo näti-sakto bhakti-yogo ‘sya siddhi-daù
Somehow or other, if one develops faith in hearing and chanting My glories, by good
fortune, being neither very disgusted with nor attached to material life, he should try to
achieve perfection by following the path of loving devotion to Me.
COMMENTARY
The  word  yadåcchayä  has  been  explained  in  the  First  Canto  of  the  Çrémad-
Bhägavatam. One develops faith in discussions of the Supreme Lord by the association
of advanced devotees. This is the main criterion for developing faith in the nectarean
glories  of  the  Lord.  By  continuously  hearing  discussions  of  the  Lord’s  transcendental
name,  fame,  qualities,  and  pastimes,  a  faithful  person  gradually  advances  on  the  path
of devotional service to the Supreme Lord. Only a faithful person is qualified to engage
in bhakti-yoga. This faith is the actual distinction between the devotees and the karmés
or  jïänés.  The  word  pumäna,  which  is  used  here,  is  singular  and  thus  stresses  that  a
devotee is very rarely found. A devotee is not overly attached to his material body, wife,
and household, nor is he excessively detached. Those who are thoroughly indifferent to
material life are eligible for cultivating jïäna, and those who are thoroughly attached to
the materialistic way of life are eligible for engaging in karma. Those who are neither
overly  attached  nor  detached  are  eligible  for  executing  bhakti.  This  is  the  difference
between those who are suitable candidates for the three processes—karma, jïäna, and
bhakti.
In the Eleventh Canto of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (11.2.2) this verse is spoken by Çré
Çukadeva Gosvämé:
ko nu räjann indriyavän mukunda-caraëämbujam
na bhajet sarvato-måtyuru päsyam amarottamaiù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
My dear King, in the material world the conditioned souls are confronted by
death at every step of life. Therefore, who among the conditioned souls would not
render service to the lotus feet of Lord Mukunda, who is worshipable even for the
greatest of liberated souls?
Every  conditioned  soul  who  has  received  the  association  of  a  pure  devotee  of  the
Lord can become qualified to engage in the devotional service of the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
Those  who  are  fond  of  cultivating  materialistic  knowledge  generally  are  devoid
of  faith  in  the  descriptions  of  the  Supreme  Lord’s  glories.  Expert  linguists  who  study
various  languages  and  dialects,  such  as  brähmé,  kharauñöi,  and  sänki,  are  sometimes
seen to be fully absorbed in materialistic life, and sometimes seen to exhibit symptoms
of  extreme  detachment.  Neither  excessive  attachment  nor  excessive  detachment  can
give  satisfaction  to  the  soul  and  so  when  one’s  faith  in  these  practices  diminishes,  he
can  develop  faith in  the  narrations of the Supreme Lord’s pastimes. When such  faith
becomes firm, one can understand that devotional service alone is the ultimate goal of
life.
Some commentators distort the meaning of the verse and dare to say that devotional
service is only meant for those who are incapable of practicing renunciation. They say
that  karma  is  recommended  for  those  who  are  expert  at  performing  activities  aiming
at material enjoyment, and jïäna is recommended for those who have the strength to
renounce such material enjoyment. Such false arguments are of no value, however.
In  conditional  life,  one  is  sometimes  absorbed  in  excessive  material  attachment,
and  sometimes  absorbed  in  trying  to  detach  himself  from  material  association.  This
is  something  like  the  movements  of  the  planets,  which  sometimes  move  forward  and
sometimes move in a retrograde manner. In any case, such materialists and ascetics are
unable  to  understand  the  transcendental  nature  of  devotional  service.  The  Supreme
Lord  and  His  eternal  associates  exist  in  a  realm  that  is  distinct  from  the  auspicious
and  inauspicious  situations  of  this  material  world.  Only  those  who  have  fallen  from
engagement in the service of the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
become  absorbed  in  such  positive  and  negative  mundane  considerations  and  thus
are  indifferent  to  the  path  of  genuine  spiritual  life.  In  this  way,  they  cause  their  own
ruination.  Some  such  persons  aspire  to  attain  the  heavenly  planets,  where  greater
facilities for sense gratification are found, and some desire to enter the darkest region of
nescience by merging into the existence of Brahman. When the modes of passion and
ignorance predominate so that the mode of goodness appears lost, one rejects the shelter
of the Lord’s lotus feet, thinking himself to be the lord of material nature.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
440 Chapter 14
One becomes spontaneously attracted to the devotional service of the Lord simply
by the causeless mercy of the Supreme Lord, or His devotee. Persons who are bewildered
by  false  ego  and  so  are  unable  to  place  their  faith  in  the  words  of  the  Supreme  Lord
and His devotees become covered by the lower modes of nature and thus take to a non-
devotional path of either excessive attachment or extreme detachment.
tävat karmäëi kurvéta na nirvidyeta yävatä
mat-kathä-çravaëädau vä çraddhä yävan na jäyate
Until  one  develops  detachment  from  fruitive  activities,  knowing  them  to  be  the
source of all miseries, and as long as a taste for hearing and chanting My glories has not
awakened,  one  must  act  according  to  the  regulative  principles  prescribed  by  the  Vedic
literature.
COMMENTARY
Those who are overly attached to a materialistic way of life are naturally suited for
following the path of fruitive activities, or karma. How long such persons will continue
on this path, and what will prompt them to accept the paths of jïäna and bhakti is being
described  in  this  verse.  One  should  continue  to  execute  the  Vedic  injunctions  with
regards to the performance of one’s occupational duties as long as one is not disgusted
with  the  materialistic  life.  Gradually,  by  the  performance  of  karma-yoga,  one’s  heart
will be cleansed of the desire to enjoy the fruit of one’s labor. When detachment arises
within the heart, one becomes eligible for accepting the path of jïäna-yoga.
In  whatever  condition  of  life  one  finds  himself  in,  if  one  becomes  spontaneously
attracted  to  hearing  about  the  Supreme  Lord  as  a  result  of  receiving  the  mercy  of  a
pure  devotee,  he  can  accept  the  path  of  devotional  service,  knowing  that  all  kinds
of  responsibilities  and  debts  are  liquidated,  as  promised  by  the  Lord  Himself.  Such  a
person has firm faith that simply by hearing and chanting the glories of the Lord, the
perfection of life can be achieved, and not by any other process. Such a firm conviction
can be attained only by the association of pure devotees of the Lord. The çruti and småti
consists of the orders of the Lord. Therefore, anyone who transgresses these orders must
be  considered  to  be  envious  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  even  though  he  may  claim  to  be  a
devotee. However, for the service of the Lord, a devotee may sometimes transgress the
Vedic injunctions, and for this, there is no fault.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
It is the opinion of some commentators that one who has not received the mercy
of a pure devotee, and who has not developed firm faith in the discussions of the Lord’s
glories,  can  also  engage  in  the  devotional  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  giving  up  all
engagement  in  fruitive  activities,  by  following  the  example  of  another  Vaiñëava.  The
injunctions of the scriptures ultimately guide one to the platform of devotional service
to the Lord, transcending the rules and regulations governing varëäçrama-dharma. It
is for this reason that the Lord has ordered: Give up all varieties of religion and simply
surrender  unto  Me.  If  someone  thinks,  “I  am  a  pure  devotee  and  so  there  is  no  need
for Me to follow any of the rules and regulations of the scriptures,” and thus does not
observe the vow of Ekädaçé, offers yogurt and milk to the Lord in a copper pot, offers
coconut water in a bell metal cup, or eats food that was not first offered to the Lord—he
transgresses the Lord’s orders propounded in the scriptures and thus commits offenses.
There are many unalloyed devotees who appear to perform fruitive activities by the
request  of  materialistic  persons.  However,  such  activities  are  performed  without  any
attachment and thus do not produce any fruitive result. The Supreme Lord has stated
in the Bhagavad-gétä 17.28:
açraddhayä hutaà dattaà tapas taptaà kåtaà ca yat
asad ity ucyate pärtha na ca tat pretya no iha
Anything done as sacrifice, charity, or penance without faith in the Supreme,
O son of Påthä, is impermanent. It is called asat and is useless, both in this life
and the next.
PURPORT
Those who are determined to enjoy sense gratification at all costs are incapable of
disassociating themselves from the desire to enjoy the fruit of their karma. Such persons
generally  show  very  little  interest  in  hearing  the  topics  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  After  a
great  deal  of  material  enjoyment,  if  one  becomes  disgusted  and  thus  assumes  a  mood
of indifference, and is fortunate enough to hear the topics of the Supreme Lord from
a  pure  devotee,  his  desire  for  sense  gratification  can  be  curbed  as  they  engage  in  the
devotional service of the Lord. Without developing a spontaneous attraction for hearing
the  topics  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  one’s  desire  for  enjoying  the  fruit  of  his  activities,  or
liberation from such entanglement, can never diminish. The only means for becoming
detached from all material desires is to develop the inclination for engagement in the
service of the Supreme Lord.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
442 Chapter 14
sva-dharma-stho yajan yajïair anäçéù-käma uddhava
na yäti svarga-narakau yady anyan na samäcaret
My dear Uddhava, one who executes his occupational duties and worships the Lord
by the performance of sacrifice, while not desiring to enjoy the fruitive results, and who
avoids forbidden activities, will not have to spend time in the heavenly or hellish planets.
COMMENTARY
Materialists who are attached to the fruits of their work attain either heaven or hell
as a result of their fruitive activities. However, one who has no desire to enjoy the fruits
of his karma while executing his occupational duties according to the Vedic injunctions,
and does not engage in prohibited activities, will neither go to the heavenly planets to
enjoy celestial sense gratification, nor go to hellish planets for punishment.
PURPORT
The  living  entities  go  to  hell  as  a  result  of  being  under  the  control  of  material
desires, which force them to engage in illicit activities. The thirst for performing pious
activities,  such  as  fire  sacrifices,  to  enjoy  the  results,  will  carry  the  living  entities  to
heaven. However, those who have no desire to enjoy the fruits of their karma will not
enjoy heavenly life nor suffer hellish conditions.
asmiû loke vartamänaù sva-dharma-stho ‘naghaù çuciù
jïänaà viçuddham äpnoti mad-bhaktià vä yadåcchayä
Those who are fixed in their occupational duties, who have renounced sinful activities,
and who have become detached from the desire to enjoy the fruit of their labor, even in
this life attain transcendental knowledge, or if fortunate, devotional service unto Me.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
COMMENTARY
One  may  question:  What  do  karmés  gain?  To  answer  this,  Çré  Kåñëa  says:  “As  a
consequence of performing activities without the desire to enjoy the result, one’s heart
becomes purified in this very lifetime, so that he can imbibe transcendental knowledge.
If  he  somehow  or  other  gets  the  association  of  a  pure  devotee,  he  can  come  to  the
platform of pure devotional service, which includes liberation from material existence.
One  who  engages  in  devotional  service  mixed  with  karma  or  jïäna  can  attain  the
platform of çänta-rati, but not the higher relationships in love of God.
PURPORT
Those who are fortunate are not prone to engage in sinful activities, being in a state
of  purified  consciousness.  When  one  factually  understands  his  relationship  with  the
Supreme Lord, he becomes fixed in his constitutional position of eternally engaging in
the service of the Lord.
svargiëo ‘py etam icchanti lokaà nirayiëas tathä
sädhakaà jïäna-bhaktibhyäm ubhayaà tad-asädhakam
The  inhabitants  of  both  the  hellish  and  heavenly  planets  pray  to  be  born  in  the
human form of life on earth, which facilitates the cultivation of transcendental knowledge
and devotional service, as opposed to hellish or heavenly existence, which does not provide
such a facility.
COMMENTARY
In the next six verses, the Lord glorifies the human form of life, which can award
one liberation, as well as loving devotional service. It is not possible for the inhabitants
of hell and heaven to cultivate spiritual knowledge or execute devotional service because
of their absorption in material pleasure and pain.
PURPORT
The  conditioned  souls  become  so  much  absorbed  in  the  happiness  of  material
enjoyment in heaven that they get no opportunity to learn anything about devotional
service, which is the only way to achieve supreme auspiciousness. The conditioned souls
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
444 Chapter 14
also do not get any opportunity to perform devotional service in the hellish condition
because of being put into excessive pains. That is why the demigods in the heaven and
the suffering living entities in hell pray to receive the human form of life on the earth
planet. One can awaken one’s constitutional position only in the human form of life,
and he can also realize the essential characteristics of devotional service, which is his
constitutional  propensity.  There  is  no  possibility  of  cultivating  sädhana  bhakti  either
in heaven or in hell. Therefore, the bodies of the inhabitants of heaven and hell make
them unfit for the cultivation of devotional service.
na naraù svar-gatià käìkñen närakéà vä vicakñaëaù
nemaà lokaà ca käìkñeta dehäveçät pramädyati
One  who  is  intelligent  should  not  desire  promotion  to  the  heavenly  planets,  nor
residence  in  hell.  One  should  also  never  become  complacent,  being  satisfied  with  his
human existence, because by such absorption in the bodily conception of life, one fails to
attain his own self-interest.
COMMENTARY
One  who  is  actually  wise,  after  receiving  the  rare  human  form  of  life,  should  not
engage  in  either  pious  or  sinful  activities  that  will  ultimately  lead  him  to  heavenly  or
hellish  conditions  of  life.  One  should  also  not  desire  to  remain  comfortable  on  this
earth. After all, if one is too attached to his material body, it will be very difficult for
him to remain fixed in devotional service.
PURPORT
An intelligent devotee desires neither heavenly pleasure nor hellish suffering. Even
though  he  may  enact  the  pastime  of  possessing  a  gross  and  subtle  body  and  travel  to
various planets, he is not contaminated by material desires.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
etad vidvän purä måtyor abhaväya ghaöeta saù
apramatta idaà jïätvä martyam apy artha-siddhi-dam
Although  this  human  body  can  award  one  liberation  from  material  existence,  one
should know that it is still subject to death. Therefore, one should sincerely endeavor for
attaining the perfection of life before death arrives.
COMMENTARY
The human body is a great asset because it can award one the ultimate goal of life.
Knowing this perfectly well, one who is learned should relentlessly try to liberate himself
from material existence before the end of life. Although the human form of body can
award one the ultimate perfection of life, it is perishable just like any other body.
PURPORT
Because  the  human  form  of  body  helps  one  attain  the  supreme  destination,  an
intelligent  person  invites  his  own  auspiciousness  by  renouncing  the  spirit  of  material
enjoyment before reaching the end of life.
chidyamänaà yamair etaiù kåta-néòaà vanaspatim
khagaù sva-ketam utsåjya kñemaà yäti hy alampaöaù
It is seen that a bird sometimes is forced to leave the tree where it had made its nest
when  the  tree  is  cut  down  by  heartless  men  who  thus  resemble  Yamaräja,  the  lord  of
death. Still, being unattached, the bird can find happiness somewhere else.
COMMENTARY
The Lord herein gives a practical example of how one can give up attachment for his
material body. The bird may live happily in its nest but when it sees that the tree is being
cut by some people who are as cruel as Yamaräja, it leaves the nest without remorse. In
the same way, one should not become attached to the tree of the material body.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
446 Chapter 14
aho-rätraiç chidyamänaà buddhväyur bhaya-vepathuù
mukta-saìgaù paraà buddhvä niréha upaçämyati
Realizing that one’s duration of life is also being cut down by each passing day and
night, one should become detached and very afraid of material existence. By endeavoring
to realize the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one will achieve perfect peace.
COMMENTARY
Knowing that the days and nights are taking away his duration of life, a sober person
acts in such a way that he ultimately obtains peace and eternal residence in the Lord’s
abode.
PURPORT
An  intelligent  devotee  of  the  Lord  realizes  that  his  duration  of  life  is  decreasing
with each passing of the day and night, and thus he acts for his own welfare by giving
up attachment to the objects of the senses. Just as a bird may leave its nest and go to
another tree, without attachment, a devotee can live anywhere, knowing that there is no
permanent residence within the material world. Instead of working hard to improve his
situation more comfortable within the temporary material existence, a devotee dedicates
himself  to  going  back  home,  back  to  Godhead,  where  life  is  eternal.  It  is  only  in  the
spiritual world, where there is no influence of the three modes of material nature, that
one can attain everlasting peace.
nå-deham ädyaà su-labhaà su-durlabhaà
plavaà su-kalpaà guru-karëadhäram
mayänukülena nabhasvateritaà pumän
bhaväbdhià na taret sa ätma-hä
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The human form of life, although very rarey achieved, is automatically awarded to
the conditioned soul, by the laws of nature. The human body can be compared to a boat,
having the spiritual master as the expert helmsman, and My instructions as the favorable
breezes. One who does not utilize his human birth for crossing over the ocean of material
existence is certainly a killer of his own soul.
COMMENTARY
Alas!  One  who  is  unfortunate  may  unexpectedly  receive  a  touchstone  but  then
throw  it  away.  This  principle  is  being  explained  herein.  This  human  form  of  body  is
like a touchstone that can fulfill all desires. Human life is obtained after going through
many millions of births and deaths. Only out of good fortune does a living entity receive
the  human  form  of  life.  The  human  body  is  compared  to  a  plava,  or  boat,  and  the
spiritual master is the helmsman who can expertly takes one across the ocean of material
existence.  The  instructions  of  the  all-merciful  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  are
compared to favorable breezes and by accepting them, one can quickly cross to the other
side of material existence. This principle is also applicable to the jïänés.
PURPORT
The human form of body is the only vehicle for a living entity to attain the ultimate
goal of life. After many births and deaths, one who is fortunate attains the human form
of  life.  The  spiritual  master,  who  is  expert  in  the  cultivation  of  God  consciousness,
acts as the boatman to take one across the ocean of material existence. The favorable
wind in the form of the Lord’s mercy guides the boat of the human body as he traverses
the  path  to  perfection.  One  who  does  not  know  that  his  body  is  a  boat,  the  spiritual
master  a  boatman,  and  the  Lord’s  instructions  a  favorable  wind,  certainly  invites  his
own ruination by becoming the killer of his soul.
yadärambheñu nirviëëo viraktaù saàyatendriyaù
abhyäsenätmano yogé dhärayed acalaà manaù
When  a  yogi  becomes  disgusted  and  hopeless  after  many  endeavors  for  material
happiness and thus completely controls his senses and develops a mood of detachment, he
should fix the mind in transcendence without deviation.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
448 Chapter 14
COMMENTARY
After glorifying the human form of body, which awards one’s real self-interest, the
Lord next describes the nature of a person who is qualified to cultivate jïäna, in this and
the following verses. One naturally becomes full of anxiety as a result of experiencing
the distress that is born of material activities. If he receives the good instructions of the
Lord or His devotee, he can develop a mood of detachment.
PURPORT
The  mind  of  a  conditioned  soul  is  always  restless  and  eager  to  direct  the  senses
toward their objects. When one develops detachment from material enjoyment, which
simply awards various miseries, as a result of his own experience, he will naturally want
to  control  his  senses,  so  that  his  mind  will  gradually  become  peaceful.  By  cultivating
Kåñëa  consciousness,  one  realizes  his  constitutional  position  and  thus  surpasses  the
platform of temporary material enjoyment as his heart becomes completely purified.
dhäryamäëaà mano yarhi bhrämyad açv anavasthitam
atandrito ‘nurodhena märgeëätma-vaçaà nayet
When one is endeavoring to free himself from material existence, the restless mind
should always be brought back under control by adhering to one’s prescribed path.
COMMENTARY
When  one  first  tries  to  control  his  mind,  it  can  be  very  difficult.  Due  to  past
bad  habits,  the  mind  may  become  twice  as  restless  when  one  tries  to  restrict  it  from
material enjoyment. The urge for material enjoyment is so strong that the mind easily
becomes  carried  away  by  such  thoughts.  In  such  a  situation,  one  should  control  the
mind by allowing it to have a little gratification in a way that is not contrary to religious
principles.
PURPORT
Because  the  conditioned  soul  has  a  natural  tendency  to  enjoy  sense  gratification,
it is inevitable that his mind will become restless when controlled. The best thing is to
divert the functions of the mind from one’s personal sense enjoyment to the service of
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
the Supreme Personality of Godhead while following the regulative principles. In this
way, if one cultivates Kåñëa consciousness, his mind will automatically be controlled.
mano-gatià na visåjej jita-präëo jitendriyaù
sattva-sampannayä buddhyä mana ätma-vaçaà nayet
One should never allow the mind to go outside the quest for spiritual advancement.
One should control the mind by engaging the senses and life-air in activities of goodness,
as directed by one’s good intelligence.
COMMENTARY
Although the tendency of the mind is to wander here and there, one must always
bring it back to the practice of self-realization by means of one’s steady intelligence. If
the mind is always engaged in the activities of Kåñëa consciousness, it will be restrained
from thoughts of sense gratificiation. The mind is naturally attached to the objects of
the  senses,  so  unless  one  is  careful  to  control  the  mind,  advancement  on  the  path  of
self-realization will be hampered.
PURPORT
Even after temporarily controlling the urges of the mind, those whose senses are not
under control can easily fall down from the path of self-realization. For this reason, the
mind and senses should always be engaged in the service of the all-auspicious Supreme
Lord. When one comes to the platform of self-realization, the restless mind will no longer
create obstacles, but rather help one. The mind is material and so it always hankers after
the objects of the senses, and is averse to the real self-interest of the spirit soul. There is
no possibility of achieving self-realization without controlling the restless mind.
eña vai paramo yogo manasaù saìgrahaù småtaù
hådaya-jïatvam anvicchan damyasyevärvato muhuù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
450 Chapter 14
One  who  is  expert  in  training  wild  horses  will  first  allow  a  horse  some  freedom.
Then,  by  pulling  the  reins,  he  will  gradually  control  the  horse.  Similarly,  one  cannot
immediately bring the mind under complete control. It must be gradually trained so that
it eventually sticks to the path of yoga.
COMMENTARY
Çré Kåñëa is herein citing the example of training a horse, to show how one must
check the urges of the mind. One must sometimes fulfill the demands of the mind in
order  to  control  it  completely.  To  control  the  mind  is  the  main  purpose  of  the  yoga
system. One who wants to control his senses should study this example given by Lord
Kåñëa.  A  horseman,  although  wanting  to  gain  full  control  of  the  horse,  will  in  the
beginning let the horse have his way for a short while. Even while doing so, he continues
to hold the rope and never allows it to run completely wild.
PURPORT
If the mind, which runs towards material enjoyment like a horse, comes to know that
its goal is the Supreme Absolute Truth, its functions can be properly utilized. When the
consideration of worshiping Lord Hari gradually awakens in the mind, it automatically
becomes  controlled.  Simply  by  engaging  the  functions  of  the  mind  in  the  service  of
the eternal object, a living entity attains auspiciousness. Therefore, in order to control
the  mind,  one  should  follow  the  path  of  yukta-vairägya,  rather  than  that  of  phalgu-
vairägya.
säìkhyena sarva-bhävänäà pratilomänulomataù
bhaväpyayäv anudhyäyen mano yävat prasédati
Until one’s mind is firmly fixed in the Absolute Truth, he should carefully observe
the temporary nature of all material objects, from the mahat-tattva, down to the gross
material body. One should observe the progressive functions of creation, and the regressive
functions of annihilation.
COMMENTARY
Here it is being explained how one can fix up his flickering mind. While engaging in
sänkhya-yoga, or the analytical study of the material world, one carefully considers the
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
varieties of creation through progressive functions, and annihilation through regressive
functions, until the mind becomes detached.
PURPORT
One  should  very  carefully  study  the  processes  of  creation  and  destruction  forever
being carried out in the material world, so that the mind can become steady on the path
of self-realization.
nirviëëasya viraktasya  puruñasyokta-vedinaù
manas tyajati daurätmyaà cintitasyänucintayä
When one finally becomes disgusted with the temporary, illusory nature of this material
world and thus achieves a state of detachment, his mind, being guided by the instructions
of his spiritual master, gradually gives up his false identification with matter.
COMMENTARY
The  phrase  ukta  vedinaù  refers  to  those  who  take  pleasure  in  discussing  the
instructions received from the spiritual master.
PURPORT
Human beings are beset with varieties of miseries when the propensity for material
enjoyment  is  strong  due  to  a  lack  of  spiritual  cultivation.  When  the  mind  is  engaged
in  the  cultivation  of  Kåñëa  consciousness,  it  protects  one  from  becoming  absorbed  in
the bodily conception of life. The renunciation of false pride due to identification with
the material body certainly goes a long way to curb the restlessness of the mind. Thus,
one  should  elevate  one’s  thinking  to  the  eternal  platform  by  carefully  receiving  the
instructions of the Lord’s representative, the spiritual master.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
452 Chapter 14
yamädibhir yoga-pathair änvékñikyä ca vidyayä
mamärcopäsanäbhir vä nänyair yogyaà smaren manaù
The  mind  can  be  fixed  on  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  by  following  the
path of yoga, beginning with yama, through logic and reasoning under the guidance of a
spiritual master, or by worshiping Me and meditating upon Me. There are no other means
than these.
COMMENTARY
Through reasoning and argument, one should come to the correct conclusion and
thus  engage  oneself  in  worshiping  the  Lord.  The  word  vä  indicates  that  one  who  is
engaged in the worship of the Personality of Godhead need not trouble himself with the
disciplinary procedures of yoga, nor with the grueling intricacies of Vedic studies and
logic. This is the opinion of Çrédhara Svämé.
PURPORT
One should curb his thirst for enjoying the objects of the senses by observing sacred
vows. One should give up the mentality that he is the enjoyer by worshiping the Deity
of  the  Lord  according  to  the  prescribed  rules  and  regulations,  and  meditate  on  the
Supreme Lord without deviation. One’s realization of his relationship with the Supreme
Lord gradually becomes established by observing Ekädaçé and chanting the holy names
of the Lord. When one is situated in his constitutional position as the servant of the
Supreme Lord, his thirst for enjoying the fruits of his activities diminishes as his mind
distances itself from thoughts of material enjoyment. Cultivating an inclination toward
the service of the Supreme Lord is the only way to curb the restless mind. One should
worship the Deity throughout the day so that his mind will always remain engaged in
remembering the Lord.
yadi kuryät pramädena yogé karma vigarhitam
yogenaiva dahed aàho nänyat tatra kadäcana
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
If a yogi, due to carelessness, performs some abominable activity, he should nullify the
sinful reaction simply by continuing his engagement in yoga. He need not undergo severe
penance or adopt some other method to purify himself.
COMMENTARY
The question may arise that if one who is detached from material life, along with
its prescribed duties, by chance commits a sinful act then how can he be freed from the
reaction of sin without undergoing atonement, which is the prescription of the karma-
käëòa  sections  of  the  Vedas?  The  answer  is  given  here  that  simply  by  continuing  his
practice  of  yoga,  all  sinful  reactions  will  be  burned  to  ashes.  Çrédhara  Svämé  has  said
that  for  a  devotee,  all  reactions  of  sinful  activities  can  be  nullified  simply  by  hearing
and chanting the holy names of the Supreme Lord. It is stated in the Sixth Canto of
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (6.1.15):
kecit kevalayä bhaktyä väsudeva-paräyaëäù
aghaà dhunvanti kärtsnyena néhäram iva bhäskaraù
Only a rare person who has adopted complete, unalloyed devotional service
to Kåñëa can uproot the weeds of sinful actions with no possibility that they will
revive. He can do this simply by discharging devotional service, just as the sun
can immediately dissipate fog by its rays.
Elsewhere in the Çrémad Bhägavatam (11.5.42) it is stated:
sva-päda-mülaà bhajataù priyasya tyaktäny abhävasya hariù pareçaù
vikarma yac cotpatitaà kathaïcid dhunoti sarvaà hådi sanniviñöaù
One who has thus given up all other engagements and has taken full shelter
at  the  lotus  feet  of  Hari,  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  is  very  dear  to
the  Lord.  Indeed,  if  such  a  surrendered  soul  accidentally  commits  some  sinful
activity,  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  who  is  seated  within  everyone’s
heart, immediately takes away the reaction to such sin.
The word yogi in this verse refers to both the jïäna-yogé and bhakti-yogé.
PURPORT
The  activities  of  the  conditioned  souls  are  of  two  kinds—pious  and  sinful.  If  an
honest  person  accidentally  commits  some  sinful  activities,  the  reactions  to  those  sins
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
454 Chapter 14
can be counteracted simply by engaging in the service of the Supreme Lord. There is no
need for a devotee of the Supreme Lord to undergo atonement as a separate endeavor.
sve sve ‘dhikäre yä niñöhä sa guëaù parikértitaù
karmaëäà jäty-açuddhänäm anena niyamaù kåtaù
guëa-doña-vidhänena saìgänäà tyäjanecchayä
For an aspiring transcendentalist, the sincere observance of his practice constitutes
piety, and the neglect of his spiritual practices constitutes sin. With this understanding of
good and evil, one should detach himself from activities of sense gratification by a sincere
practice of his discipline.
COMMENTARY
How can a yogi be relieved of all sinful reactions simply by continuing his practice
of yoga, with no necessity for performing any other atonement? In this verse Çré Kåñëa
explains the actual standard of piety. A yogi who steadfastly executes his yoga practice
while  remaining  aloof  from  the  duties  prescribed  under  the  jurisdiction  of  karma-
käëòa is actually pious, and one who gives up such practice is actually sinful. It is widely
declared in the scriptures that jïäna and bhakti are competent to destroy all kinds of
sinful  reactions,  so  that  jïänés  and  bhaktas  are  never  required  to  undergo  atonement
as  a  separate  endeavor.  If  one  does  so,  he  commits  two  faults—the  fault  of  giving  up
his  prescribed  duty,  and  the  fault  of  adopting  another’s  duty.  Actually,  all  classes  of
transcendentalists,  and  especially  devotees,  are  devoid  of  the  propensity  to  commit
sinful  activities.  Even  if  by  chance  they  do  so,  the  powerful  purifying  effects  of  their
respective  processes  destroy  their  sinful  reactions  without  difficulty.  It  is  the  verdict
of  the  Vedic  literature  that  one  is  prohibited  to  see  the  apparent  faults  of  one  who
is  continuously  engaged  in  the  devotional  service  of  the  Lord,  even  if  he  accidentally
commits  sinful  activities.  A  devotee  is  situated  in  the  transcendental  position  and  so
he does not possess material qualities, nor is he subjected to considerations of material
sins or piety. Because jïänés are supposed to be firmly situated in the mode of goodness,
they  also  are  considered  to  be  beyond  the  influence  of  the  baser  qualities  of  passion
and  ignorance.  On  the  other  hand,  karmés  are  by  nature  impure  so  that  the  karma-
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
käëòa  sections  of  the  Vedas  prescribe  rules  and  regulations  for  their  guidance  and
purification. Fruitive workers are attached to their homes and material bodies and thus
have performed countless sinful activities, beginning from their birth. For this reason,
the  Vedas  instruct  fruitive  workers  to  continue  acting  with  material  attachment,  but
in a way that will gradually elevate them to the mode of goodness. This will be more
elaborately described in the next chapter.
PURPORT
The living entity must execute his duties according to his position under the three
modes  of  material  nature.  When  one  engages  in  a  occupation  other  than  that  which
is prescribed for him, this creates a discrepancy. The performance of prescribed duties
and the avoidance of forbidden acts enables attached materialists to gradually become
detached from  the spirit of  enjoying the fruit of their labor. As soon as  one performs
forbidden, or sinful, acts distressful conditions are created. Just to free the conditioned
soul from his distressful condition of life, the scriptures prescribe rules and regulations
to guide his behavior.
As long as one fails to awaken his loving devotional service to the Supreme Lord, he
will continue to desire the four objectives of human life, placing him under the control of
the Vedic rules and regulations. When one is fully engaged in a process of transcendental
realization, however, the mundane conceptions of good and bad no longer apply.
TEXTS 27-28
jäta-çraddho mat-kathäsu nirviëëaù sarva-karmasu
veda duùkhätmakän kämän parityäge ‘py anéçvaraù
tato bhajeta mäà prétaù çraddhälur dåòha-niçcayaù
juñamäëaç ca tän kämän duùkhodarkäàç ca garhayan
Having awakened his faith in the narrations of My glories, understanding the futility
of all material activities, and knowing that sense gratification ultimately leads to misery,
but  still  being  unable  to  renounce  all  kinds  of  sensual  diversions,  My  devotee  should
remain  satisfied  and  worship  Me  with  great  faith  and  conviction.  Even  though  he  is
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
456 Chapter 14
sometimes engaged in material enjoyment, My devotee knows that such activity simply
leads to a miserable result, and so he sincerely repents such activities.
COMMENTARY
Here, the Lord describes the primary characteristic of devotional service. A devotee
naturally becomes indifferent to worldly activities and Vedic prescriptions because he
knows that these will ultimately award him distress. He knows that material desires are
sources of all miseries. If a devotee, despite understanding this, is unable to completely
renounce  activities  of  sense  gratification,  he  should  still  engage  in  the  service  of  the
Supreme Lord with firm determination. He should not become depressed, thinking that
his devotional serviced is inadequate. A devotee thinks, “Even if I meet with so many
impediments and even though I am full of offenses, I will never for a moment give up
the service of the Lord. Fruitive activities and mental speculation are useless and so I
will never accept these as my paths. I am still very attached to the objects of this world
and  I  know  that  this  will  only  bring  me  misery.  I  must  go  on  in  this  way  and  simply
hope  for  that  day  when  the  Lord  will  become  merciful  towards  me.”  Even  if,  due  to
material  sentiment,  a  devotee  associates  with  his  wife  and  children  and  thus  indulges
in sense gratification, he thinks, “Alas! This material enjoyment creates many anarthas
because  it  is  opposed  to  my  advancement  in  the  Lord’s  devotional  service.  Although
I had promised many times to give up this material enjoyment, I still indulge in sense
gratification from time to time.”
PURPORT
By hearing discussions of the Supreme Lord’s glories, one is liberated from the desire
to  enjoy  the  fruits  of  karma.  Only  those  who  are  faithfully  engaged  in  hearing  and
chanting the holy names of the Supreme Lord can understand that desires for material
enjoyment are the causes of distress. When, even after trying to give up such distressful
activities,  devotees  fail  to  completely  do  so,  they  should  faithfully  go  on  serving  the
Supreme  Lord  with  determination.  Devotees  condemn  the  miserable  condition  that
arises  from  material  activities  and  while  trying  to  give  up  such  bad  association,  they
engaged  in  the  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord  with  determination.  There  is  actually
nothing  inauspicious  in  the  devotional  service  of  the  Lord.  Occasional  difficulties
experienced by a devotee are due to his previous material activities. On the other hand,
the endeavor for sense gratification is completely inauspicious. Thus sense gratification
and  devotional  service  are  directly  opposed  to  each  other.  In  all  circumstances  one
should therefore remain the Lord’s sincere servant, always believing in His mercy. Then
one will certainly go back home, back to Godhead.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
proktena bhakti-yogena bhajato mäsakån muneù
kämä hådayyä naçyanti sarve mayi hådi sthite
When one constantly engages in My service as described by Me, his heart becomes
firmly fixed in Me so that all material desires that may have been present in his heart are
vanquished without separate endeavor.
COMMENTARY
One may question: “Do not the devotees of the Lord suffer material miseries just like
other people?” The answer is given in this verse—definitely not. The material desires
that  are  present  within  the  heart  of  a  devotee  are  gradually  destroyed  as  they  go  on
faithfully  hearing  the  glories  of  the  Lord  and  engaging  in  His  devotional  service.  A
devotee of the Lord situates Çré Kåñëa on a beautiful throne within his heart and there
offers  the  Lord  constant  service.  Just  as  the  rising  sun  gradually  eliminates  all  trace
of  darkness,  the  Lord’s  presence  within  the  heart  causes  all  material  desires  there  to
weaken and eventually disappear.
PURPORT
The senses are continuously engaged according to the proclivities of the mind, so that
material desires enter the mind, one after another. Those who are devotees twenty-four
hours a day engaged in the service of the Lord by hearing and chanting His glories with
transcendental faith will find that such material desires gradually diminish. Instead of
trying to enjoy independently, the devotees are convinced that the Lord is the supreme
enjoyer and all others are meant to partake in His enjoyment.
bhidyate hådaya-granthiç chidyante sarva-saàçayäù
kñéyante cäsya karmäëi mayi dåñöe ‘khilätmani
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
458 Chapter 14
The knot in the heart is cut asunder, all misgivings are slashed to pieces, and the chain
of action and reaction is stopped when I am understood to be the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
COMMENTARY
The knot created when one’s heart is bound to illusion by false identification with
the material body is cut to pieces when one attains the stages of niñöhä or rucé, without
separate  endeavor.  Engagement  in  devotional  service  quickly  eliminates  all  material
desires  within  the  heart,  just  as  fire  in  the  stomach  digests  all  that  we  eat.  The  word
karmäné  in  this  verse  refers  to  sinful  reactions  that  have  not  yet  fructified.  In  this
regard, the Gopäla-täpané Upaniñad states: bhaktir asya bhajanaà tad ihämutropädhi-
nairäsyenämuñmin manaù-kalpanam, etad eva naiñkarmyam: “Bhakti means devotional
service to the Lord that is free from desire for material profit, either in this life or in
the  next.  Being  devoid  of  such  inclinations,  one  should  fully  absorb  the  mind  in  the
Supreme Lord. This is the actual purpose of naiñkarmya.
PURPORT
When one understands the Supreme Absolute Truth to be the ultimate shelter of
everyone, one’s desire for enjoying the fruits of karma will gradually diminish. By full
engagement in the devotional service of the Supreme Lord, the knot of false ego within
the heart is destroyed and all doubts are removed. The Supreme Lord is the shelter of
all  kinds  of  rasa.  Indeed,  He  is  the  personification  of  all  transcendental  mellows.  By
remaining satisfied by the pleasure of engaging in devotional service, one can give up
the desire for mundane enjoyment and mental speculation.
tasmän mad-bhakti-yuktasya yogino vai mad-ätmanaù
na jïänaà na ca vairägyaà präyaù çreyo bhaved iha
For one who has fixed his mind upon Me, being constantly engaged in My devotional
service, mere renunciation and the cultivation of knowledge are not considered means for
attaining perfection.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
COMMENTARY
Devotional  service  has  the  potency  to  destroy  the  knots  of  false  ego  within  the
heart without one’s taking help from any other process. Therefore, the devotees of the
Lord  are  not  interested  in  cultivating  knowledge  or  practicing  renunciation  outside
the  purview  of  devotional  service.  Devotional  service  is  the  only  all-auspicious  path,
whereas  the  cultivation  of  knowledge  and  dry  renunciation  are  of  no  value  without
connection  to  devotional  service.  By  chanting  and  hearing  the  glories  of  the  Lord,  a
devotee  automatically  realizes  all  knowledge,  and  as  the  devotee’s  attachment  to  the
Lord  increases,  he  automatically  gives  up  attachment  for  the  inferior  material  nature.
Knowledge and renunciation are products of the mode of goodness, whereas devotional
service  is  transcendental  to  the  three  modes  of  material  nature.  If  one  engages  in
devotional  service,  then  it  is  a  fault  to  separately  cultivate  knowledge  and  practice
renunciation.  Just  as  attachment  and  envy  are  byproducts  of  ignorance,  knowledge
and renunciation are naturally attained for one who is engaged in devotional service.
Because knowledge of the Absolute Truth and renunciation of material enjoyment are
concomitant factors of devotional service, devotees become knowledgeable and detached
without  separate  endeavor.  This  is  confirmed  elsewhere  in  the  Çrémad-Bhägavatam
(11.2.42):
bhaktiù pareçänubhavo viraktir anyatra caiña trika eka-kälaù
prapadyamänasya yathäçnataù syus tuñöiù puñöiù kñud-apäyo ’nu-ghäsam
Devotion, direct experience of the Supreme Lord, and detachment from other
things—these three occur simultaneously for one who has taken shelter of the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  in  the  same  way  that  pleasure,  nourishment
and relief from hunger come simultaneously and increasingly, with each bite, for
a person engaged in eating.
By the use of the word präyaù (generally) in this verse, it appears that in some cases,
in  the  primary  state  of  sänta  bhakti,  it  is  not  inauspicious  to  accept  the  processes  of
cultivation of knowledge and renunciation. Still, devotional service ensures liberation
without any impediment. This is the opinion of Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu.
PURPORT
One  can  never  achieve  real  benefit  simply  by  the  cultivation  of  knowledge  while
remaining  indifferent  to  the  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  When  one  is  fully  devoted
to  the  Supreme  Lord,  he  is  on  the  platform  of  complete  auspiciousness.  There  is  no
possibility  for  attaining  factual  benefit  as  long  as  the  impersonal  conception  of  the
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
460 Chapter 14
Absolute Truth remains prominent. Simply by the execution of pure devotional service,
genuine knowledge and proper renunciation are obtained. The constitutional duty of the
spirit soul is to engage in the devotional service of the Supreme Lord. Transcendental
knowledge  and  factual  renunciation  are  fully  manifest  in  those  who  are  continuously
engaged in the service of the Lord.
TEXTS 32-33
yat karmabhir yat tapasä jïäna-vairägyataç ca yat
yogena däna-dharmeëa çreyobhir itarair api
sarvaà mad-bhakti-yogena mad-bhakto labhate ‘ïjasä
svargäpavargaà mad-dhäma kathaïcid yadi väïchati
Whatever  can  be  attained  by  other  process  of  elevation  that  are  recommended  in
the  scriptures  can  be  easily  achieved  by  My  devotees.  If  My  devotee  desires  liberation
from material existence or residence in the heavenly planets, he achieves these without
difficulty.
COMMENTARY
A  question  may  be  raised:  “If  a  devotee  who  is  faithfully  engaged  in  the  Lord’s
devotional service and thus has no interest in performing karma or jïäna, and yet desires
to go to heaven or attain liberation from material existence, what will he achieve?” The
reply is given in these two verses. By following other auspicious paths, such as traveling
to holy places of pilgrimage, one can attain sälokya mukti, or residence in the eternal
abode of the Supreme Lord. Whatever can be gained by the various paths of perfection
is easily achieved by the devotees by means of their execution of devotional service. If
a  devotee  so  desires,  he  can  easily  attain  worldly  happiness,  purification  of  the  heart,
liberation, and even residence in the abode of the Supreme Lord, on the strength of his
devotional service.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
PURPORT
Whatever can be obtained as a result of performing fruitive activities, performing
severe austerities, cultivating knowledge, renunciation of the objects of the senses, giving
in charity, performing pious activities, and controlling the senses, are effortlessly obtained
by the devotees of the Supreme Lord due to the strength of their devotional service. The
devotees of the Lord can easily attain the heavenly planets, relief from material distress,
the five kinds of liberation, such as särñöi, and residence in Vaikuëöha.
na kiïcit sädhavo dhérä bhaktä hy ekäntino mama
väïchanty api mayä dattaà kaivalyam apunar-bhavam
Even if I offer liberation from the vicious cycle of repeated birth and death to those
pure devotees who are very sober, they do not accept it.
COMMENTARY
Here,  the  word  kathaïcit  (somehow  or  other)  of  the  previous  verse  is  being
explained.
PURPORT
In this verse, the words ekäntino mama indicate that those who are pure devotees
of  the  Lord  are  cent  percent  engaged  in  the  devotional  service  of  the  Lord  with  no
separate interest. Even if the Lord offers liberation to such devotees, they do not accept
it. The pure devotee is assured of going back home, back to Godhead, to reside with the
Lord eternally, and so for him, mere liberation without devotional service is not at all
appealing. One who engages in the devotional service of the Lord while maintaining a
desire for liberation or heavenly enjoyment cannot be considered a pure devotee. The
constitutional position of the living entity is that he is the eternal servant of the Lord,
and that is being described herein.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
462 Chapter 14
nairapekñyaà paraà prähur niùçreyasam analpakam
tasmän niräçiño bhaktir nirapekñasya me bhavet
The perfection of liberation is achieved when one is completely detached from matter.
A devotee who has no personal ambition is eligible for engaging in My loving devotional
service.
COMMENTARY
The  word  nairapekñyaà  means  “not  desiring  any  other  process  of  perfection  and
its results.” The word niräçiña means “one who does not seek personal gain.” The word
nirapekña also means “to remain aloof from anything not related to Kåñëa.”
PURPORT
Those  who  are  completely  devoid  of  desires  for  personal  sense  enjoyment  are  the
devotees  of  the  Lord,  and  not  those  who  take  no  interest  in  the  Lord’s  devotional
service,  such  as  the  impersonalists.  Only  those  fortunate  souls  who  have  no  material
desires are able to achieve the platform of unalloyed devotional service to the Supreme
Lord. Undoubtedly, in this age of Kali, people are generally very fallen and polluted by
material lust, greed, anger, lamentation, and so forth. In this age, most people are sarva-
käma, or full of material desires. Still, we must understand that simply by taking shelter
of Lord Kåñëa we will achieve everything in life. The living entity should not engage in
any process except the loving service of the Lord.
na mayy ekänta-bhaktänäà guëa-doñodbhavä guëäù
sädhünäà sama-cittänäà buddheù param upeyuñäm
My  unalloyed  devotees,  who  are  without  material  attachment,  who  treat  all  living
entities equally, and who have attained Me, who is beyond the reach of material intelligence,
are not subject to material piety and impiety, which arise from the good and evil of this
world.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
COMMENTARY
It  was  previously  said  that  the  mentality  of  finding  faults  and  good  qualities  is
itself faulty, and to rise above such a mentality is praiseworthy. This principle is being
explained in this verse.
Unalloyed  devotees  of  the  Lord  are  not  subject  to  the  influence  of  the  modes  of
goodness, passion, and ignorance, which give birth to all good qualities and faults. The
pure  devotees  possess  transcendental  qualities.  Because  their  intelligence  is  purified,
they  only  aspire  to  attain  the  shelter  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  who  is
eternal, full of knowledge, and full of bliss. It will be explained later on that the mind
and senses of the devotees of the Lord are fully transcendental and so devotees are not
under the jurisdiction of Vedic rules and regulations. Devotees do not acquire piety by
their proper conduct, nor do they incur sin by indulging in prohibited activities. While
narrating  the  story  of  King  Citraketu,  Lord  Mahädeva  described  the  devotees’  equal
vision in this verse (Çrémad-Bhägavatam 6.17.28):
näräyaëa-paräù sarve na kutaçcana bibhyati
svargäpavarga-narakeñv api tulyärtha-darçinaù
Devotees solely engaged in the devotional service of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Näräyaëa, never fear any condition of life. For them the heavenly
planets, liberation and the hellish planets are all the same, for such devotees are
interested only in the service of the Lord.
One should not see a devotees’ intense desire to attain the lotus feet of the Supreme
Lord  as  mundane,  or  as  a  fault.  Even  if  some  sinful  activities  are  seen  in  the  life  of
devotee, one should not see this as a fault. This has been ordered by the Supreme Lord
Himself in the Bhagavad-gétä (9.30):
api cet su-duräcäro bhajate mäm ananya-bhäk
sädhur eva sa mantavyaù samyag vyavasito hi saù
Even if one commits the most abominable action, if he is engaged in devotional
service,  he  is  to  be  considered  saintly  because  he  is  properly  situated  in  his
determination.
PURPORT
One should not find faults or discrepancies in the character of an unalloyed devotee
of  the  Supreme  Lord.  The  devotees  of  the  Lord  are  equal  to  everyone  and  are  to  be
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 14
uddhava-gétä
considered saintly. Because they are engaged in the service of the sac-cid-änanda Lord,
who is situated beyond the reach of material intelligence, they are not subject to the piety
and  impiety  that  are  born  from  the  good  and  evil  of  this  world.  Worldly  conceptions
create  illusion  and  distinctions  in  the  minds  of  the  living  entities,  and  place  them  in
the position of enjoyers. On the other hand, pure devotees who are fully engaged in the
Lord’s devotional service are not confined to desires for material enjoyment.
evam etän mayä diñöän anutiñöhanti me pathaù
kñemaà vindanti mat-sthänaà yad brahma paramaà viduù
Those who follow the path of devotional service as instructed by Me attain freedom
from  illusion,  and  upon  reaching  My  personal  abode,  they  perfectly  understand  the
Absolute Truth.
COMMENTARY
The Lord is herein concluding His discussion of the path of auspiciousness. Those
who travel on this path that is instructed by the Lord actually achieve ultimate benefit.
The devotees of the Lord reach the abode of the Lord, Vaikuëöha, whereas the jïänés
become merged in Brahman.
PURPORT
Unrestricted sense gratification, performance of fruitive activities, and engagement
in  mental  speculation  cannot  be  the  ultimate  religion  for  the  living  entities.  Because
these  practices  are  born  from  aversion  to  the  Lord’s  service,  they  are  temporary  and
incomplete.  The  devotees  who  follow  the  instructions  of  the  Supreme  Lord  become
liberated from the clutches of all inauspiciousness by accepting the path of devotional
service.  Such  devotees  obtain  the  ultimate  benefit  of  transferring  themselves  to  the
abode of the Supreme Lord, Vaikuëöha.
Thus  end  the  translation  of  the  fourteenth  chapter  of  the  Uddhava-géta  entitled
“Pure Devotional Service Surpasses Knowledge and Detachment” with the commentaries
of  Çréla  Viçvanätha  Cakravarté  Öhäkura  and  chapter  summary  and  purports  by  Çréla
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 15
exPLanatIon of the vedIC Path
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Some people are unfit for practicing any of the three forms of yoga—karma, jïäna,
and  bhakti.  Such  persons  are  inimical  to  Lord  Kåñëa,  attached  to  sense  gratification,
and  are  only  interested  in  performing  fruitive  activities  so  that  they  can  fulfill  their
material desires. This chapter describes their faults in terms of place, time, substance,
and beneficiary of actions.
Those  who  are  perfect  in  knowledge  and  devotion  to  the  Lord  have  no  material
good qualities or faults. However, for one who is acting on the platform of karma in the
hopes of transcending material existence, the execution of his prescribed duties is good,
and the failure to do so is evil. Those activities that counteract sinful reactions are also
considered to be good.
When one is endeavoring to remain fixed in the mode of goodness, the cultivation
of knowledge is always helpful. When one is engaged in the devotional service of the
Lord,  the  nine  practices,  beginning  with  hearing  and  chanting,  are  most  beneficial.
Everything that is detrimental to one’s advancement in spiritual life should be avoided.
However, for those who are simply interested in engaging in fruitive work with the aim
of gratifying the senses, there are innumerable considerations of what is good and what
is pious and what is sinful, what is purifying and what is contaminating. All of these
must be carefully considered in terms of time, place, circumstances, and the performer
of the work
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
466 Chapter 15
Factually,  virtue  and  fault  are  not  absolute,  but  are  relative  to  one’s  particular
platform  of  advancement.  Remaining  fixed  in  the  discrimination  that  is  suitable  to
one’s  level  of  advancement  is  good,  and  anything  contrary  to  that  is  bad.  This  is  the
basic  understanding  of  virtue  and  fault.  Even  among  objects  belonging  to  the  same
category,  there  are  different  considerations  of  their  purity  or  impurity  in  relation  to
performance of religious duties, worldly transactions, and the maintenance of one’s life.
These distinctions are described in various scriptures.
In the varëäçrama society, there are very clear injunctions designating what is pure
and what is contaminating. With regards to place, it is said that the presence of black
deer is auspicious. Actions must be performed after considering the time as well. Purity
and impurity with regards to substances is exemplified by bathing, giving in charity, and
performing austerities. The mind can always be purified by remembering the Supreme
Lord.  There  are  also  distinctions  of  purity  and  impurity  regarding  the  performers  of
activities.  When  a  mantra  is  received  from  the  lips  of  a  bona  fide  spiritual  master,  it
is considered pure, and all work, as well as all objects, are considered purified by being
offered to the Supreme Lord. For the execution of religious principles, these six factors
must be considered in terms of purity and impurity.
Ultimately, there is no fixed standard by which to make distinctions of virtue and
fault,  because  they  transform  according  to  the  place,  time,  beneficiary,  and  so  on.  In
regard  to  the  execution  of  prescribed  duties  for  sense  gratification,  the  actual  intent
of  all  the  scriptures  is  the  subduing  of  materialistic  propensities.  This  is  the  actual
principle of religion because only this destroys sorrow, confusion, and fear, and bestows
all good fortune. Work performed for sense gratification is not actually beneficial. The
descriptions  of  such  fruitive  benefits  described  in  the  sections  of  the  Vedic  literature
known as phala-çruti are actually meant to help one gradually cultivate a taste for the
highest  benefit.  Unfortunately,  those  possessing  inferior  intelligence  take  the  flowery
benedictory verses of the scriptures to be the actual purport of the Vedas. However, this
opinion is never upheld by those who factually know the truth of the Vedas. Those whose
minds  are  agitated  by  the  flowery  words  of  the  Vedas  have  no  attraction  for  hearing
discussions of Lord Hari. It should be understood that there is no inner purport to the
Vedas apart from the original Personality of Godhead. The Vedas focus exclusively upon
the Supreme Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead. Because this material world is
simply the illusory energy of the Supreme Lord, the Vedic literature always recommends
that one become aloof from material association by becoming attached to the Absolute
Truth.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Explanation of the Vedic Path
çré-bhagavän uväca
Ya etän mat-patho hitvä bhakti-jïäna-kriyätmakän
kñudrän kämäàç calaiù präëair juñantaù saàsaranti te
The Supreme Lord said: Those who will not follow the paths of devotional service,
speculative knowledge, and fruitive activities, as prescribed by Me, and simply work to
fulfill their insignificant material desires, will certainly continue in the cycle of repeated
birth and death.
COMMENTARY
Here,  Lord  Kåñëa  condemns  those  who  simply  work  hard  for  achieving  sense
gratification  without  any  care  for  spiritual  advancement.  Devotional  service  places
one  directly  under  the  shelter  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  whereas  the
cultivation of speculative knowledge leads one to the impersonal Brahman conception
of the Absolute Truth. By executing one’s duties without attachment to the results, one
also  becomes  detached  from  fruitive  desires.  In  contrast,  those  who  work  hard  in  the
hopes of ruling a kingdom or enjoying celestial delights will certainly continue on the
path of material existence.
PURPORT
Those who renounce the paths of performing fruitive activities without attachment,
cultivating transcendental knowledge, and devotional service, are certainly uncontrolled
and  thus  take  pleasure  in  gratifying  their  insignificant  desires  for  sense  gratification.
Unalloyed  devotional  service  is  certainly  superior  to  devotional  service  mixed  with
karma and devotional service mixed with jïäna. Where there is no tinge of devotional
service,  there  is  only  desire  for  sense  gratification,  or  the  desire  for  renouncing  sense
gratification.  Those  whose  aim  is  either  material  enjoyment  or  impersonal  liberation
cannot gain ultimate freedom from the cycle of repeated birth and death.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
468 Chapter 15
sve sve ‘dhikäre yä niñöhä sa guëaù parikértitaù
viparyayas tu doñaù syäd ubhayor eña niçcayaù
To remain fixed in one’s position is known as piety, or qualities, and to deviate from
one’s  position  is  known  as  impiety,  or  fault.  This  is  how  piety  and  impiety  should  be
ascertained.
COMMENTARY
Çré  Uddhava  said,  “My  dear  Lord,  I  had  asked  You  how  one  can  determine  good
qualities and faults. You had replied by saying that to find fault with Your devotee was
itself a fault. But, what if a devotee appears to be faithfully engaged in Your service but
somehow  or  other  comes  under  the  influence  of  karmés  or  jïänés,  and  thus  deviates
from his engagement in pure bhakti? Is it a mistake to find fault in such a devotee? What
about  a  person  who  is  a  neophyte  in  spiritual  life  but  after  coming  in  contact  with  a
pure  devotee,  decides  to  imitate  such  an  exalted  soul?  If  one  prematurely  gives  up  his
occupational duties, thinking that he is situated on the liberated platform, although he
is still in the bodily conception of life—isn’t that also to be considered as faulty?”
In reply to this inquiry of Uddhava, the Lord said, “The characteristics of faults and
piety can be understood in this way. To remain fixed in one’s natural position is always
to be considered a good quality. Occasionally, a neophyte devotee may become polluted
by  the  association  of  those  engaged  in  fruitive  activities  and  mental  speculation,  so
that  he  becomes  affected  by  mundane  tendencies.  Similarly,  an  ordinary  person  who
observes the exalted status of a pure devotee sometimes externally imitates his activities,
considering  himself  to  be  on  the  same  exalted  platform  of  pure  devotional  service.
These  imperfect  practitioners  of  bhakti-yoga  are  not  exempt  from  criticism  because
their fruitive activities, mental speculation and false prestige are material intrusions in
the  pure  loving  service  of  the  Lord.  A  pure  devotee  engaged  exclusively  in  the  Lord’s
service should not be criticized, but a devotee whose devotional service is mixed with
material qualities may be corrected so that he can rise to the platform of pure devotional
service.”
PURPORT
One’s faithfulness to his particular status is to be considered one’s good quality. If,
due to restlessness, one tries to imitate the position of another, that is to be understood
as  a  fault.  Different  processes  of  self-realization  exist  because  of  people  are  at  various
stages of development. When one who is engaged in the devotional service of the Lord
exhibits a spirit of enjoyment or a propensity for dry renunciation, his position is faulty.
When one accepts a position that is favorable for his advancement in life that is to be
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Explanation of the Vedic Path
considered a good quality, whereas when one accepts a position that is unfavorable for
his advancement, that is a fault.
çuddhy-açuddhé vidhéyete samäneñv api vastuñu
dravyasya vicikitsärthaà guëa-doñau çubhäçubhau
dharmärthaà vyavahärärthaà yäträrtham iti cänagha
O sinless Uddhava, to understand what is proper in life, one must evaluate everything,
such as religious principles and considerations of economic development, in terms of its
purity and impurity. Even in ordinary dealings, one must be able to distinguish between
good and bad. As a matter of survival, one must be able to distinguish between that which
is auspicious and that which is inauspicious.
COMMENTARY
Here, the Lord is further describing the necessity for considering qualities and faults.
Uddhava  has  presented  his  doubt,  and  the  Lord  will  remove  it.  Every  doubt  can  be
removed by good instruction, just as mosquitoes can be removed by smoke. Every material
object has its good qualities or faults. For example, bästaka spinach is considered pure,
whereas kalamé spinach is considered impure. In this way, the faults and good qualities,
or the piety and impiety, must be considered in all aspects of practical life. The same
principle also applies to religion, as well as all kinds of ordinary dealings. Even though
one  who  is  well  situated  in  terms  of  good  behavior  comes  from  a  lower-class  family,
he should be considered a superior person, due to his possessing good qualities. There
are also auspicious and inauspicious times to be considered while beginning a journey.
Although accepting charity from an inappropriate person is a fault, in an emergency, or
to save one’s life, one may accept whatever is required.
PURPORT
Whether in ordinary dealing, religious practices, or basic survival, one cannot avoid
making a distinction between good and bad. Religious principles must be followed for
the  upkeep  of  society  and  for  this  purpose,  there  must  be  a  correct  ascertainment  of
what is piety and what is sin, what is pure and what is impure. It is practically seen that
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
470 Chapter 15
everyone makes such distinctions with regards to food, residence, associates, and so on.
Just  to  insure  one’s  survival,  one  must  distinguish  between  that  which  is  healthy  and
that which is injurous, and that which will be profitable and that which will result in
disaster. Thus it is to be concluded that even a wise man must distinguish between that
which  is  favorable  and  that  which  is  unfavorable  in  this  material  world,  while  at  the
same  time  understanding  the  transcendental  position  above  the  dualities  of  material
existence.
darçito ‘yaà mayäcäro dharmam udvahatäà dhuram
I have revealed these methods for making distinctions for those who bear the burden
of maintaining mundane religious principles.
PURPORT
Materialistic  persons,  who  are  attached  to  enjoying  the  results  of  their  activities,
must  constantly  consider  the  purity  and  impurity,  vice  and  virtue,  and  good  qualities
and  faults  of  all  their  actions.  Transcendentalists  are  not  confined  to  such  material
conceptions,  however.  In  this  regard,  one  should  discuss  these  two  verses  from  the
Caitanya-caritämåta:
kåñëa-bhaktira bädhaka——yata çubhäçubha karma
seha eka jévera ajïäna-tamo-dharma
‘dvaite’ bhadräbhadra-jïäna, saba-‘manodharma’
‘ei bhäla, ei manda’,——saba ‘bhrama’
All kinds of activities, both auspicious and inauspicious, that are detrimental
to the discharge of transcendental loving service to Lord Çré Kåñëa are actions of
the darkness of ignorance. (Adi 1-94)
In the material world, conceptions of good and bad are all mental speculations.
Therefore, saying, ‘This is good and this is bad,’ is all a mistake. (Antya 4.174)
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Explanation of the Vedic Path
bhümy-ambv-agny-aniläkäçä bhütänäà païca-dhätavaù
ä-brahma-sthävarädénäà çärérä ätma-saàyutäù
Earth,  water,  fire,  air  and  ether  are  the  five  gross  elements  emanating  from  the
Supreme Lord that make up the bodies of all conditioned souls from Lord Brahmä down
to the most insignificant blade of grass.
COMMENTARY
The varieties of good qualities and faults are understood from the authority of the
Vedic literature. The Vedic literature makes such distinctions to help the conditioned
souls  on  their  gradual  march  towards  progress  in  spiritual  life.  Earth,  water,  fire,  air,
and sky are the five material elements. These are the primary ingredients of the gross
material bodies of all living entities, up to the standard of Brahmä.
vedena näma-rüpäëi viñamäëi sameñv api
dhätuñüddhava kalpyanta eteñäà svärtha-siddhaye
My  dear  Uddhava,  although  all  material  bodies  are  constituted  of  these  same  five
elements, different names are given so that one can distinguish between them and thus
advance toward life’s ultimate goal.
COMMENTARY
Although the bodies of all conditioned souls are made of the same five gross material
elements, they are designated by various names and forms. The Vedic literature takes
into account such varieties and classifies  human society in terms of varëa and äçrama.
Thus, someone is a brähmaëa, someone else is a brahmacäré, another person is a betel
nut  merchant,  and  still  another  is  an  oil  merchant.  One  may  question,  “What  is  the
need for such diversity?” The answer is that the Vedic system is designed by the Lord so
that conditioned souls may pursue their individual achievements and at the same time
advance toward the ultimate goal of life, Kåñëa consciousness.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
472 Chapter 15
deça-kälädi-bhävänäà vastünäà mama sattama
guëa-doñau vidhéyete niyamärthaà hi karmaëäm
O foremost of devotees, in order to regulate the activities of the living entities, I have
imparted  the  understanding  of  that  which  is  good  and  that  which  is  bad  in  relation  to
time, place, and objects.
COMMENTARY
In the previous verse, the Lord explained why the Vedic literature assigns different
positions  to  the  various  bodies  of  the  living  entities.  In  this  verse,  the  Lord  explains
the  Vedic  evaluation  regarding  the  entities  that  interact  with  the  various  classes  of
material bodies. The purpose of the Vedic literature is to restrict the sinful propensities
of  human  beings  by  establishing  proper  behavior  for  all  classes  of  men  and  defining
what is improper with regards to time, place, and the objects of this world.
PURPORT
A conditioned soul falsely identifies with the gross body and thus considers anything
that gives immediate satisfaction to the body to be good and anything inconvenient or
disturbing  for  the  body  to  be  bad.  By  higher  intelligence,  however,  one  can  recognize
one’s long-term self-interest and dangers. By designating and restricting the exploitation
of  the  material  world,  Vedic  knowledge  gradually  brings  a  conditioned  soul  to  the
platform of material goodness. At that stage, one becomes eligible to serve the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
kåñëa-säro ‘py asauvéra-kékaöäsaàskåteriëam
Those  places  where  there  are  no  spotted  deer,  where  respect  is  not  given  to  the
brähmaëas,  where  general  cleanliness  and  the  purificatory  rites  of  Vedic  society  are
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Explanation of the Vedic Path
neglected, where meat-eaters predominate, and where the earth is barren, such as Kékaöa,
are to be considered as contaminated.
COMMENTARY
In these eight verses, Çré Kåñëa describes the purity and impurity of objects, places,
and  times.  Among  countries,  those  where  there  is  no  spotted  deer  are  considered  to
be  impure.  Besides  this,  any  country  where  the  inhabitants  do  not  show  respect  to
the  brähmaëas  is  considered  most  impure.  The  word  kåñëasära  means  “spotted  deer.”
Countries where the people are uncivilized, or asauvira, which are inhabited by mlechhas,
and where food grains do not grow because the land is barren are considered impure.
Kékaöa refers to the province of Gayä.
PURPORT
While  living  at  the  gurukula,  brahmacärés  dress  in  the  hide  of  spotted  deer.  It  is
required  to  wear  this  during  the  period  of  learning  about  sacrifice.  The  skin  of  the
black or spotted antelope is also used as a garment by those receiving instruction in the
execution of Vedic sacrifice. Therefore, since sacrifice cannot be properly performed in
areas  bereft  of  such  creatures,  these  places  are  considered  impure.  Even  if  people  are
advanced  in  terms  of  pious  activities  and  the  performance  of  sacrifice,  their  country
is considered to be impure if they are averse to the devotional service to the Supreme
Lord.
When  there  was  no  respect  for  devotional  service  to  Lord  Hari  in  countries  such
as Aìga (Bihar) and Baìga (Bengal), they were counted as impure. However, after the
appearance of great Vaiñëavas, such as Çré Jayadeva Gosvämé, they have been glorified
by the scriptures for their purity, even though they were also considered impure because
of not having spotted deer.
karmaëyo guëavän kälo dravyataù svata eva vä
yato nivartate karma sa doño ‘karmakaù småtaù
A  time  is  considered  to  be  auspicious  when  it  facilitates  the  execution  of  one’s
prescribed duties, and that time which obstructs the execution of one’s prescribed duties
is considered inauspicious.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
474 Chapter 15
COMMENTARY
Now, the purity and impurity of various times is being explained. Any time that is
suitable  for  executing  one’s  prescribed  duty  is  considered  to  be  pure.  The  time  where
one obtains the ingredients necessary for performing one’s work is considered pure by
nature. The most auspicious time for performing karma-yoga is before noon. When a
woman gives birth to a child, she is considered to be impure.
PURPORT
As there is consideration of purity and impurity with regards to place, there is also
consideration of purity and impurity with regards to time. The time when one obtains
the  ingredients  for  performing  one’s  occupational  duty,  and  the  time  which  is  spent
performing pious activities are naturally auspicious. Any time or condition that impedes
the  performance  of  one’s  occupational  or  religious  duty  must  be  considered  as  most
inauspicious.  The  most  auspicious  of  all  times  is  the  moment  one  achieves  the  mercy
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If one neglects the loving service of the Lord,
being  carried  away  by  sense  gratification,  he  is  certainly  living  in  most  inauspicious
times.  Therefore  that  moment  in  which  one  achieves  the  association  of  the  Supreme
Lord  or  the  Lord’s  pure  devotee  is  the  most  auspicious  time,  whereas  the  moment  of
losing such association is most inauspicious.
dravyasya çuddhy-açuddhé ca dravyeëa vacanena ca
saàskäreëätha kälena mahatvälpatayätha vä
An object’s purity or impurity is established by contact with another object, by words,
by rituals, by the effects of time, or according to its magnitude.
COMMENTARY
Here,  purity  and  impurity  is  being  explained.  The  purity  of  pots  is  attained  by
washing  them  with  water,  and  they  become  impure  when  touched  by  urine,  or  other
abominable  substances.  The  words  of  a  saintly  brähmaëa  are  pure,  but  the  sound
vibration of a materialistic person is contaminated by lust and envy. After the birth of
a child or the death of a family member, the next ten days are considered to be impure.
Water fetched by an outcaste is considered to be pure if it is from a large lake filled with
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Explanation of the Vedic Path
lotus flowers. However, if it is brought from a small pond or well, it is considered to be
impure. Impure food in the mode of ignorance is certainly to be avoided, except in the
case of a dire emergency.
PURPORT
The consideration of an article’s purity or impurity is determined by its proximity
to  other  things.  For  example,  articles  touched  by  urine  are  considered  to  be  impure,
but if they are touched by Ganges water, they are considered to be pure. Although the
conchshell is the bone of a dead animal, it is accepted as pure because the Vedas declare
this as being a fact. Purity and impurity also depends on saàskära, indicating that the
purity or impurity of a particular object is ascertained according to the regulations of
ritualistic performances. For example, a flower to be offered to the Deity must be purified
with water. Flowers or food cannot be offered to the Deity, however, if they have been
contaminated by being smelled or tasted before the offering.
çaktyäçaktyätha vä buddhyä samåddhyä ca yad ätmane
aghaà kurvanti hi yathä deçävasthänusärataù
The  contact  of  contaminated  substances  may  or  may  not  affect  one  with  sinful
contamination,  depending  upon  one’s  prowess,  spiritual  advancement,  development  of
intelligence, or other such conditions.
COMMENTARY
According  to  the  laws  of  nature,  that  which  is  impure  contaminates  a  particular
person  in  accordance  with  that  person’s  situation,  as  described  here.  For  example,  on
certain occasions, such as a solar eclipse or just after childbirth, one must restrict the
intake of food according to ritualistic injunctions. One who is physically weak, however,
may  eat  without  being  considered  impious.  Ordinary  persons  consider  the  ten  days
following childbirth to be most auspicious, whereas one who is learned knows that this
period is actually impure. Worn, dirty clothing is considered impure for a rich man but
acceptable for one who is poor. The word deça indicates that in a safe and peaceful place
one is obligated to strictly perform religious rituals, whereas in a dangerous or chaotic
situation  one  may  be  excused  for  occasional  negligence  of  secondary  principles.  One
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
476 Chapter 15
who is physically healthy must offer obeisances to the Deities, attend religious functions
and  execute  his  prescribed  duties,  but  a  young  child  or  sickly  person  may  be  excused
from  such  activities,  as  indicated  by  the  word  avasthä.  Thus  the  revealed  scriptures
teach that one should consider purity and impurity according to the place, time, person,
and circumstances.
PURPORT
The difference between purity and impurity, as well as piety and impiety, depends
upon  the  place,  circumstances,  health  of  a  person,  and  prosperity.  One  should  accept
everything  which  is  favorable  for  the  devotional  service  of  Lord  Kåñëa  and  reject
whatever is unfavorable. One must learn the process of serving God from the bona fide
spiritual master and thus always maintain one’s existence pure and free from anxiety. In
general, however, when considering the relative purity and impurity of material things,
all of the above-mentioned factors must be calculated. It can thus be concluded that the
same conditions are perceived differently by swan-like personalities, and those who are
no better than dogs, hogs, camels and asses.
dhänya-därv-asthi-tantünäà rasa-taijasa-carmaëäm
käla-väyv-agni-måt-toyaiù pärthivänäà yutäyutaiù
Various objects such as grains, wooden utensils that are used for performing sacrifice,
elephant  tusks,  liquid  items  such  as  oil  and  ghee,  metal  such  as  gold,  leather,  and  clay
pots—can all be purified by contact with time, air, fire, earth, and water.
COMMENTARY
The  Lord  herein  explains  in  detail  how  various  articles  become  pure  by  contact
with certain elements. The word asthi refers to “elephants’ tusks.” The word rasa in this
verse refers to oil or ghee. The word taijasa refers to gold, and other metals. All these are
considered to be pure according to sästra when they are combined with water, fire, and
other elements, and used at a particular time. For example, a clay pitcher and bricks are
considered pure, but when they are in their original form as earth they are considered
impure. Metals, such as gold, can be purified by clay, water, and fire. Raw silk is purified
simply by contact with the air.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Explanation of the Vedic Path
amedhya-liptaà yad yena gandha-lepaà vyapohati
bhajate prakåtià tasya tac chaucaà tävad iñyate
If  a  surface,  a  container,  or  cloth  is  contaminated  by  the  touch  of  an  abominable
object, it can be purified by cleansing with caustic soda, acid, and water, until the smell
or dirt is completely removed.
COMMENTARY
If  meat,  or  any  other  abominable  substance,  is  kept  on  a  surface,  a  cloth,  or  in  a
pot, then these can be purified by scrubbing and washing with acid, detergent, clay, and
water, until the contamination is removed. One should cleanse a contaminated object
until  the  bad  odor  or  impure  coating  is  removed,  thereby  restoring  it  to  its  original
condition.
snäna-däna-tapo-’vasthä-vérya-saàskära-karmabhiù
mat-småtyä cätmanaù çaucaà çuddhaù karmäcared dvijaù
One can purify the self by bathing, giving charity, performing austerity, undergoing
purificatory rituals, as well as by personal prowess, the performance of prescribed duties,
and above all, remembrance of Me. One who is twice-born should purify himself before
he engages in prescribed duties.
COMMENTARY
After explaining how various objects can be purified, the Lord now describes the
means  for  purifying  the  self.  One  can  purify  himself  by  bathing,  distributing  charity,
and by performing the activities that are prescribed for his various stages in life. The
word  saàskära  means  “rituals,  such  as  the  sacred  thread  ceremony,  and  the  chanting
of  mantras.”  It  is  necessary  for  the  members  of  all  varëas  to  purify  themselves  before
performing their prescribed duties.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
478 Chapter 15
PURPORT
The conditioned souls can purify themselves by bathing, giving charity, performing
austerity,  acting  according  to  the  rules  and  regulations  prescribed  for  his  situation
within the varëäçrama system, undergoing the fifteen kinds of saàskära, and above all,
by remembering the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, Viñëu. In this regard ,one should
carefully consider this verse from the Garuòa Puräëa:
apavitraù pavitro vä sarvävasthäà gato ’pi vä
yaù smaret puëòarékäkñaà sa bähyäbhyantare çuciù
Whether  one  is  pure  or  contaminated,  and  regardless  of  one’s  external
situation, simply by remembering the lotus-eyed Personality of Godhead, one can
internally and externally cleanse one’s existence.
mantrasya ca parijïänaà karma-çuddhir mad-arpaëam
dharmaù sampadyate ñaòbhir adharmas tu viparyayaù
A mantra is purified when it is heard from the mouth of a bona fide spiritual master.
One’s activities are purified by offering the results to Me. Purified place, time, ingredients,
performer, mantras, and actions constitute religion, and negligence of these six constitutes
irreligion.
COMMENTARY
The  purification  of  a  mantra  is  being  described  in  this  verse.  When  mantras  are
received from the mouth of a bona fide spiritual master, they are considered purified.
One’s activities are purified when the results are offered in the service of the Supreme
Lord.  Purification  of  the  place,  time,  ingredients,  performer,  mantras,  and  action
constitutes religion, and a failure to do so constitutes irreligion.
PURPORT
The  purification  of  the  place,  time,  ingredients,  performer,  mantra,  and  action
constitutes religion, and the negligence of such purification is considered irreligion. If
one does not receive a mantra from a bona fide spiritual master, who exhibits purified
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Explanation of the Vedic Path
behavior, then he falls into a state of inauspiciousness because a mantra is no better than
poison when it is received from a so-called spiritual master who is actually a disciple of
Kali. When actions are performed for one’s own sake, or for the sake of one’s family or
community,  they  are  considered  to  be  impure.  Whenever  an  action,  time,  place,  and
so  on  are  not  in  relation  to  the  Supreme  Lord,  they  must  be  considered  impure  and
irreligious.
kvacid guëo ‘pi doñaù syäd doño ‘pi vidhinä guëaù
guëa-doñärtha-niyamas tad-bhidäm eva bädhate
Sometimes,  what  seems  to  be  piety  is  actually  sin  and  sometimes,  what  normally
is  sinful  is  to  be  considered  as  pious.  Because  of  this,  it  seems  that  there  is  no  clear
distinction between piety and sin.
COMMENTARY
Here  it  is  explained  that  piety  and  sin  are  actually  relative  conceptions.  If  a  man
abandons his wife and children, he must certainly be considered a rascal number one.
Still, when a man gives up his family to accept the renounced order of life, sannyäsa, he
is offered the respect due a great soul. It must therefore be concluded that piety and sin
depend upon circumstances, and are therefore not easily ascertained.
PURPORT
Human  beings  are  considered  to  be  capable  of  distinguishing  between  good  and
bad and are thus responsible for their pious and sinful activities. Animals, on the other
hand, being merged in ignorance, cannot be blamed for their offenses, which arise from
ignorance. Human beings who act like animals, with the idea that one should not feel
any guilt but should do whatever he likes, will certainly take birth as animals absorbed
in ignorance.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
480 Chapter 15
samäna-karmäcaraëaà patitänäà na pätakam
Autpattiko guëaù saìgo na çayänaù pataty adhaù
Activities that would degrade an elevated person do not cause a fall down for those
who are already fallen. Indeed, one who is lying on the ground cannot possibly fall any
further. The material association that is dictated by one’s own nature is considered a good
quality. For example, association with a woman is a fault for a person in the renounced
order of life, but it is a good quality for a householder.
COMMENTARY
For an elevated person, drinking wine would be the cause of his degradation but an
ordinary laborer who could moderate his drinking would be considered pious. From this
example, we can understand that on the material platform, piety and sin are relative.
Another  example  is  that  if  a  sannyäsé  intimately  associates  with  a  woman,  he  would
be  considered  most  abominable,  whereas  that  same  association  for  a  householder  is
considered pious. The conclusion is that piety and sin on the material level are relative
considerations.
PURPORT
For  one  who  is  full  of  faults,  his  actions  cannot  be  the  cause  of  his  degradation
because they are natural for him. One who is lying on the floor cannot go any lower.
The possibility of falling down looms large for those who are elevated, but not for those
who are already fallen. The nature of a talented person is never considered to be faulty.
Because  transcendentalists  know  that  sense  enjoyers  and  dry  renunciates  are  fallen,
they are careful to avoid their association or imitate their behavior.
yato yato nivarteta vimucyeta tatas tataù
eña dharmo nåëäà kñemaù çoka-moha-bhayäpahaù
The more one distances himself from sinful or materialistic activities, the more he is
freed from their bondage. Such renunciation is the basis of religion and drives away all
kinds of lamentation, illusion, and fear.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Explanation of the Vedic Path
COMMENTARY
The  aim  of  the  scriptures  is  to  encourage  renunciation  by  means  of  a  gradual
diminishing of the enjoying propensity. This is done by prescribing rules and regulations
that govern all aspects of human behavior.
PURPORT
The  conception,  “I  am  the  enjoyer  of  this  temporary,  perishable  material  world,”
creates lamentation, illusion, and fear in the minds of the conditioned souls. People who
renounce  sense  gratification  and  dry  renunciation  and  engage  in  the  worship  of  the
Supreme Lord bring about their own auspiciousness. In this regard, one should carefully
consider this verse from the Caitanya-caritämåta (Antya 6.220):
mahäprabhura bhakta-gaëera vairägya pradhäna
yähä dekhi’ préta hana gaura-bhagavän
Renunciation  is  the  basic  principle  sustaining  the  lives  of  Çré  Caitanya
Mahäprabhu’s devotees. Seeing this renunciation, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, is extremely satisfied.
viñayeñu guëädhyäsät puàsaù saìgas tato bhavet
saìgät tatra bhavet kämaù kämäd eva kalir nåëäm
When  one  is  attracted  to  the  objects  of  the  senses,  attachment  for  them  certainly
develops  within  his  heart.  This  attachment  gives  rise  to  lust,  and  from  lust,  anger  and
violence are generated.
COMMENTARY
In these four verses, the Supreme Lord is demonstrating the uselessness of the path
of  enjoyment,  although  it  is  sometimes  encouraged  in  the  Vedas.  Desire  is  the  cause
of  attachment,  and  from  attachment,  lust  develops.  A  lusty  person  is  easily  angered
and  becomes  inimical  to  anyone  frustrating  his  lusty  desires.  For  this  reason,  there  is
constant strife within human society.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
482 Chapter 15
kaler durviñahaù krodhas tamas tam anuvartate
tamasä grasyate puàsaç cetanä vyäpiné drutam
From quarrel arises unbearable anger, from anger bewilderment is produced, and from
bewilderment, one quickly loses his power of discrimination.
COMMENTARY
From conflict of interest comes anger, followed by tama, or illusion. Due to illusion,
one becomes bewildered, and this causes one to become completely bereft of any sense
of discrimination.
PURPORT
From the tendency to enjoy material objects, considering them to be separate from
the Supreme Lord, one develops attachment. From attachment, lust is born, and from
lust, a conflict of interest arises. When there is a conflict of interest, strong anger results,
and from this unbridled anger, one is covered by the dense darkness of ignorance, which
robs one of the power of discrimination.
tayä virahitaù sädho jantuù çünyäya kalpate
tato ‘sya svärtha-vibhraàço mürcchitasya måtasya ca
O  saintly  Uddhava,  a  person  who  has  lost  his  power  of  discrimination  is  as  good
as  dead  matter.  As  a  result  of  his  ignorance,  he  loses  the  opportunity  to  achieve  life’s
ultimate goal.
COMMENTARY
An unconscious person loses all sense of what is to be done and what is not to be
done. Such a person is considered to be as good as dead because he has lost all sense of
life’s ultimate goal.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Explanation of the Vedic Path
PURPORT
When  one  becomes  bereft  of  the  power  of  discrimination,  he  loses  his  good
consciousness, almost like a dead man, and falls down from understanding life’s ultimate
goal.
viñayäbhiniveçena nätmänaà veda näparam
våkña jévikayä jévan vyarthaà bhastreva yaù çvasan
One who uselessly passes his life by maintaining himself on whatever food he receives
without personal endeavor is no better than a tree. Living uselessly in ignorance like a
tree, his breathing is no better than that of a bellows. Such a person, who is almost like a
dead man, has no understanding of himself, or anyone else.
COMMENTARY
One who lives like a tree, without making any personal endeavor, is considered to
be  practically  unconscious.  One  whose  breathing  is  therefore  like  that  of  a  bellows  is
considered to be no better than a dead man.
PURPORT
One who is devoid of Kåñëa consciousness uselessly breathes like a bellows and spoils
his human birth by being absorbed in matter, just like a tree, without any enthusiasm for
attaining life’s ultimate goal.
phala-çrutir iyaà nèëäà na çreyo rocanaà param
çreyo-vivakñayä proktaà yathä bhaiñajya-rocanam
The  attainment  of  heavenly  enjoyment  as  the  result  of  pious  activities  is  not  the
ultimate goal of life for human beings. Just as a child is promised a sweet to create his
desire  for  taking  medicine,  the  promise  of  heavenly  rewards  that  are  described  in  the
scriptures are there to create a desire for performing pious activities.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
484 Chapter 15
COMMENTARY
It has been heard from the scriptures that materialistic people can go to heaven if
they  perform  pious  activities.  Therefore,  how  can  they  be  considered  to  be  deviating
from the ultimate goal of life? The answer is given in this verse. Such inducements to
perform pious activities are not actually life’s ultimate goal. The great sage, Närada, has
said,  “Destruction  of  distress  and  attainment  of  happiness  is  auspicious.  This  cannot
be achieved by the performance of fruitive activities.” By this statement, the ultimate
auspiciousness  of  karma  is  refuted.  Then,  what  about  statements  found  in  the  Vedic
literature  such  as,  “Enjoy  life  with  the  damsels  of  heaven?”  The  answer  is  that  just
to  develop  in  the  conditioned  souls  a  taste  for  performing  pious  activities,  the  Vedic
literature sometimes offers inducements to gradually bring them to the path of liberation.
This  is  like  the  inducement  given  to  a  child  so  that  he  will  take  some  medicine.  The
father may tell him, “If you drink this bitter juice of neem leaves, I will give you a laddu.”
Because of the inducement, the son will agree to drink the bitter medicine and thus his
disease will be cured. Of course, the gift of a laddu is not the actual fruit of drinking
bitter neem juice.
PURPORT
When fruitive workers hear about the tempting fruits of karma, they cannot resist
the  temptation.  Actually,  they  are  deceived  by  such  flowery  language  of  the  Vedas
because such fruitive work, in and of itself, cannot award one ultimate benefit.
utpattyaiva hi kämeñu präëeñu sva-janeñu ca
äsakta-manaso martyä ätmano ‘nartha-hetuñu
Right from their birth, human beings naturally becomes attached to the animalistic
propensities, a long duration of life, sense gratification, bodily strength, personal influence,
friends, and family— all of which create anarthas that defeat the real purpose of life.
COMMENTARY
The question may be raised, “In the karma-käëòa sections of the Vedas, there is no
mention of liberation from material existence. Therefore, by what authority can one state
that liberation is the goal of karma?” The answer is given herein: “The primary purport
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Explanation of the Vedic Path
of the Vedas supports this statement. By nature, the conditioned souls are attached to
material enjoyment since the moment of their birth. As a result, they become attached
to  their  senses,  strength,  influence,  wife,  children,  and  other  relatives.  However,  such
attachment is simply anartha, or unwanted, and therefore produces only distress.
natän aviduñaù svärthaà bhrämyato våjinädhvani
kathaà yuïjyät punas teñu täàs tamo viçato budhaù
Those  whose  knowledge  is  covered  by  ignorance,  and  are  thus  acting  against  their
self-interest,  are  wandering  on  the  path  of  material  existence.  Why  would  the  Vedas
encourage them to enter deeper into darkness by engaging them in sense gratification?
COMMENTARY
Generally,  materialistic  people  are  ignorant  of  their  real  self-interest,  which  is
the  platform  of  ultimate  happiness.  Therefore,  the  Vedic  literature  does  not  actually
encourage  faithful  persons  to  act  in  a  way  that  will  enable  them  to  enjoy  heavenly
pleasure  and  thereafter  be  born  in  the  lower  species  of  life.  If  this  were  the  actual
intention of the Vedas, they could not be considered genuinely auspicious.
evaà vyavasitaà kecid avijïäya kubuddhayaù
phala-çrutià kusumitäà na veda-jïä vadanti hi
Without understanding the actual intention of the Vedic literature, some evil-minded
people, such as the karma-mémäàsakas, who are bewildered by the statements promising
heavenly rewards that are found in the Vedas, propagate that such flowery statements are
the supreme objective of life. However, this is not the opinion of actual authorities, such
as Vyäsadeva, who know the real purport of the Vedas.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
486 Chapter 15
COMMENTARY
One may still question, “Why do the mémäàsakas declare that the aim of the Vedas
is to transfer the living entities to heaven?” The answer is herein given: “Such people,
not realizing the real intention of the Vedas, accept the Vedic statements that promise
heavenly elevation to be the actual purport of the Vedas. Actually, the flowery language
of the Vedas have bewildered these people. Due to ignorance, they consider the flowers to
be the fruit. As a result of being bewildered, their intelligence has become contaminated
so that they are misguided. Such persons certainly do not know the actual purport of
the Vedas. Great sages, such as Vyäsadeva, who are conversant with the actual purport
of the Vedas, never preach in this way.
käminaù kåpaëä lubdhäù puñpeñu phala-buddhayaù
agni-mugdhä dhüma-täntäù svaà lokaà na vidanti te
Materialistic men, who are naturally very lusty and greedy, think the flowery words
of  the  Vedas  to  be  their  actual  purpose.  Being  blinded  by  the  smoke  and  glare  of  the
sacrificial fire, they cannot understand their actual position.
COMMENTARY
In the next eight verses, Çré Kåñëa exposes the evil-mindedness of the mémäàsakas.
Those  who  consider  the  irrelevant  results  of  karma  to  be  their  aim  of  life  become
absorbed  in  the  performance  of  Vedic  sacrifices,  which  can  be  compared  to  a  glaring
fire.  As  a  result,  they  are  overcome  by  the  smoke  produced  by  that  fire  and  thus  lose
their power of discrimination. While blinded by the smoke, they wander on the path of
material existence and thus experience countless miseries.
na te mäm aìga jänanti hådi-sthaà ya idaà yataù
uktha-çasträ hy asu-tåpo yathä néhära-cakñuñaù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Explanation of the Vedic Path
My  dear  Uddhava,  those  who  perform  the  Vedic  rituals  in  the  hopes  of  achieving
future sense gratification cannot understand that I am situated within the hearts of all
living entities, and that this universe is non-different from Me, being a manifestation of
My energy. It is as if their eyes are covered by a dense fog.
COMMENTARY
Although the Lord is situated in the hearts of the mémäàsakas, they do not know
Him as the original cause of the cosmic manifestation. The false bodily concept of life,
in which one ignores the eternal soul within the body, is a dense fog of ignorance that
blocks our vision of God. Mémäàsakas refers to those whose eyes are covered with fog of
ignorance. It is stated in the Vedas that the Supreme Lord is situated within the hearts
of all living entities as the Supersoul. However, because people are covered by ignorance
and indulge in idle talks, they cannot know Him.
PURPORT
In  spite  of  the  Lord’s  existence  within  the  hearts  of  all  living  entities,  they  still
engage in sense gratification and thus lose their power of vision.
TEXTS 29-30
te me matam avijïäya parokñaà viñayätmakäù
hiàsäyäà yadi rägaù syäd yajïa eva na codanä
hiàsä-vihärä hy älabdhaiù paçubhiù sva-sukhecchayä
yajante devatä yajïaiù pitå-bhüta-patén khaläù
“If one has a propensity for violence in the form of eating meat, one may slaughter
an animal during the performance of a fire sacrifice.” By this statement, the Vedas have
regulated the propensity for violence. The Vedas neither encourage animal slaughter nor
prescribe it. Without understanding My inner intentions, fruitive workers, who are fond
of  violence,  worship  the  demigods,  forefathers,  and  leaders  of  ghostly  creatures,  with  a
desire to achieve heavenly pleasure, and thus they cruelly slaughter innocent animals in
sacrifice.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
488 Chapter 15
COMMENTARY
Although  the  Vedas  sometimes  recommend  the  performance  of  animal  sacrifices,
this is actually meant to restrict the killing of animals, and not to encourage it. Because
there is always a class of men who will eat meat, the Vedas prescribe the performance
of  elaborate  rituals  at  certain  prescribed  times,  just  to  discourage  unrestricted  animal
slaughter.  It  is  only  misguided  philosophers  that  encourage  the  sacrifice  of  animals  as
a  means  for  enjoying  sense  gratification  in  this  life,  and  attaining  the  planets  of  the
demigods or forefathers after death.
PURPORT
Being influenced by the mode of ignorance, there are many people who consider the
performance of sacrifices mentioned in the Vedas to be the their supreme religious duty.
Such people generally worship the forefathers, demigods, and ghosts in order to enjoy a
life of sense gratification, both in this world and the next, and thus they take pleasure
in killing animals in the name of performing sacrifices.
svapnopamam amuà lokam asantaà çravaëa-priyam
äçiño hådi saìkalpya tyajanty arthän yathä vaëik
Just  as  a  foolish  businessman,  desiring  to  obtain  additional  wealth,  may  cross  the
insurmountable  ocean  and  invest  his  previously  accumulated  wealth  speculatively,  and
thus lose everything, fruitive workers, desiring to experience heavenly pleasure after death,
which is only like a dream, whimsically waste their time performing Vedic sacrifices.
COMMENTARY
Fruitive  workers  are  actually  very  unfortunate.  This  is  being  pointed  out  in  this
verse.  Both  in  this  world  and  in  the  heavenly  planets,  life  is  temporary.  Materialistic
people  resolve  to  enjoy  like  a  king  in  this  world,  and  so  seek  the  demigods’  blessings
for this purpose. Still, they are always full of anxieties. They spend a huge amount of
wealth for conducting Vedic sacrifices, just as a merchant takes the risk of crossing the
insurmountable ocean in the hopes of accumulate great wealth. However, in the long
run,  both  lose  their  hard-earned  wealth  while  making  a  risky  journey  that  does  not
provide eternal benefit.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Explanation of the Vedic Path
PURPORT
It is the nature of material existence that causes everyone to work very hard for the
purpose of enjoying sense gratification as far as possible. As eternal fragmental parts and
parcels of the Lord, we can enjoy a blissful life in His association but instead, we waste
our time struggling for existence in this illusory material manifestation. It is something
like a businessman who foolishly squanders all his wealth on a useless business venture
that yields no profit.
rajaù-sattva-tamo-niñöhä rajaù-sattva-tamo-juñaù
upäsata indra-mukhyän devädén na yathaiva mäm
Fruitive  workers  are  under  the  influence  of  the  three  modes  of  material  nature—
goodness, passion, and ignorance—and they worship the demigods, who are also under
the influence of the three modes of material nature, but they fail to worship Me, who is
transcendental to the three modes of material nature. Although the demigods, headed by
Indra, are parts and parcels of Me, when they are worshiped as being independent from
Me, this constitutes an impropriety.
COMMENTARY
Those  who  are  under  the  influence  of  the  three  modes  of  material  nature  act
according to their situation under the modes of nature. Although the demigods, headed
by Indra, are parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, worshiping them is not considered
to be direct worship of the Lord. Sometimes persons situated in the mode of goodness
accept  the  supremacy  of  the  Supreme  Lord  but  are  more  attracted  to  the  demigods,
believing  that  through  Vedic  rituals  they  can  achieve  the  same  standard  of  living  as
the demigods. This proud tendency is certainly an obstacle in the loving service of the
Supreme Lord and ultimately causes falldown. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä
(9.24):
ahaà hi sarva-yajïänäà bhoktä ca prabhur eva ca
na tu mäm abhijänanti tattvenätaç cyavanti te
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
490 Chapter 15
I am the only enjoyer and master of all sacrifices. Therefore, those who do not
recognize My true transcendental nature fall down.
PURPORT
Those  who  consider  themselves  to  be  servants  of  the  demigods  can  overcome  the
influence  of  the  modes  of  passion  and  ignorance  by  acting  in  the  mode  of  goodness.
However,  although  they  enthusiastically  worship  the  demigods,  headed  by  Indra,  they
have no taste for worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Even the demigods,
who are supposed to be situated in the mode of goodness, often oppose the worship of
the Supreme Lord, creating a situation that is inauspicious.
TEXTS 33-34
iñöveha devatä yajïair gatvä raàsyämahe divi
tasyänta iha bhüyäsma mahä-çälä mahä-kuläù
evaà puñpitayä väcä vyäkñipta-manasäà nåëäm
mäninäà cäti-lubdhänäà mad-värtäpi na rocate
Discussions  about  Me  are  not  pleasing  to  those  who  are  greedy  and  proud,  and
whose  minds  are  attracted  to  the  flowery  words  of  the  karma-käëòa sections  of  the
Vedas.  Because  of  their  excessive  pride  and  greed,  they  think,  “We  will  go  to  heaven
as  a  result  of  worshiping  the  demigods  and  enjoy  immense  happiness  there.  When  our
enjoyment is exhausted, we will return to this world, being born in a family of aristocratic
householders.”
COMMENTARY
The attached fruitive workers think that they will perform sacrifice in this world to
please the demigods and when they finish enjoying heavenly delights, they will return
to this world to become rich householders.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Explanation of the Vedic Path
PURPORT
Bewildered by the flowery words of the Vedas, greedy and proud materialists do not
have any interest in satisfying the senses of the master of the senses.
vedä brahmätma-viñayäs tri-käëòa-viñayä ime
parokña-vädä åñayaù parokñaà mama ca priyam
The Vedas, which consists of three divisions, reveal that the soul is spiritual and has
nothing to do with material existence. The soul is not a product of matter. Great sages
explain this truth in an esoteric manner, and I approve of their confidential teachings.
Those who are pure-hearted are eligible to receive Vedic knowledge, whereas those whose
hearts are contaminated certainly fall down.
COMMENTARY
The  Vedas  are  divided  into  three  sections,  referred  to  as  karma-käëòa,  brahma-
käëòa,  and  devatä-käëòa.  The  Vedic  literature  teaches  the  science  of  the  individual
spirit  soul  and  the  supreme  Brahman.  Human  beings  are  supposed  to  worship  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead by chanting the mantras that are revealed in the Vedic
literature. The question may arise, “Why do the sages and the Vedic mantras speak in
esoteric or indirect terms?” The answer is: “The Supreme Lord does not allow Himself to
be taken cheaply, and thus He is not manifest to superficial or inimical people.”
PURPORT
One  who  depends  upon  material  sense  perception  remains  in  gross  ignorance  of
the  Absolute  Truth.  One  who  depends  upon  mental  and  intellectual  speculation  may
get a clue that the eternal soul and Supersoul are both within the material body. In this
regard, one should study the tenth verse of the Upadeçämåta of Çré Rüpa Gosvämé:
karmibhyaù parito hareù priyatayä vyaktià yayur jïäninas
tebhyo jïäna-vimukta-bhakti-paramäù premaika-niñöhäs tataù
tebhyas täù paçu-päla-paìkaja-dåças täbhyo ‘pi sä rädhikä
preñöhä tadvad iyaà tadéya-sarasé täà näçrayet kaù kåté
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
492 Chapter 15
In the çästra it is said that of all types of fruitive workers, he who is advanced
in knowledge of the higher values of life is favored by the Supreme Lord Hari.
Out of many such people who are advanced in knowledge (jï änés), one who is
practically liberated by virtue of his knowledge may take to devotional service. He
is superior to the others. However, one who has actually attained prema, pure love
of Kåñëa, is superior to him. The gopés are exalted above all the advanced devotees
because  they  are  always  totally  dependent  upon  Çré  Kåñëa,  the  transcendental
cowherd boy. Among the gopés, Çrématé Rädhäräëé is the most dear to Kåñëa. Her
kuëòa (lake) is as profoundly dear to Lord Kåñëa as this most beloved of the gopés.
Who, then, will not reside at Rädhä-kuëòa and, in a spiritual body surcharged
with  ecstatic  devotional  feelings  (apräkåtabhäva),  render  loving  service  to  the
divine couple Çré Çré Rädhä-Govinda, who perform Their añöakäléya-lélä, Their
eternal eightfold daily pastimes. Indeed, those who execute devotional service on
the banks of Rädhä-kuëòa are the most fortunate people in the universe.
çabda-brahma su-durbodhaà präëendriya-mano-mayam
ananta-päraà gambhéraà durvigähyaà samudra-vat
The transcendental sound of the Vedas is very difficult to comprehend and manifests
on  different  levels  within  the  life-air,  senses,  and  mind.  Actually,  the  transcendental
sound of the Vedas is unlimited, unfathomable, and very grave like an ocean.
COMMENTARY
The transcendental sound vibration of the Vedas exists in four stages, as understood
by those who are highly qualified brähmaëas. Three of these stages are internally situated
and only the fourth stage is manifest externally as speech. Even this fourth stage of the
Vedas is very difficult for ordinary people to understand, and so what to speak of the
other  three.  The  präëa  stage  of  the  Vedic  sound  vibration  is  located  in  the  ädhära-
cakra. The mental stage is located in the region of the navel, in the maëipüraka-cakra.
The intellectual stage is located in the region of the heart, in the anähata-cakra, and
the sensory stage is referred to as vaikharé.
The  transcendental  vibration  of  the  Vedas  encompasses  all  the  energies  within
creation and is beyond the limitations of time and space. It is so subtle and sublime that
only the Lord Himself and His representatives can understand its actual purport.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Explanation of the Vedic Path
PURPORT
Because foolish people consider the transcendental name of Lord Hari to be equal
to  ordinary  mundane  sound  vibrations,  while  remaining  engaged  in  sense  enjoyment
with their body, mind, and life air, the Supreme Lord appears incomprehensible to them.
The transcendental name of the Supreme Lord and the Supreme Lord Himself are non-
different.  Because  transcendental  sound  vibration  and  the  object  of  transcendental
sound vibration are unfathomable, no one can realize their glories without the mercy of
the Supreme Lord. The four levels of transcendental sound—parä, paçyanté, madhyamä,
and  vaikharé—are  completely  transcendental,  devoid  of  material  contamination,  and
untouched  by  the  spirit  of  mundane  enjoyment.  Therefore,  the  mentality  of  sense
enjoyers and dry renunciates makes a distinction between transcendental sound and its
object, thereby inviting inauspiciousness.
mayopabåàhitaà bhümnä brahmaëänanta-çaktinä
bhüteñu ghoña-rüpeëa viseñürëeva lakñyate
I am the unlimitedly powerful Supreme Lord, situated within the bodies of all living
beings, wherein I establish the subtle form of transcendental sound.
COMMENTARY
Transcendental  sound  vibration  manifests  in  different  phases,  according  to  the
inspiration of the Supreme Lord. The question may arise: “If the Supreme Lord is one
without a second, how is it possible that He remains present as unlimited spiritual and
material manifestations?” The answer is given in this verse: “I am the almighty Lord. I
manifest innumerable forms of unlimited potency and by the expansion of these forms, I
am all-pervading. For those who can perceive Me in meditation, I am realized as oàkära
within the heart.” In this verse, the Lord cites the example of a strand of fiber within a
lotus stem.
PURPORT
Because  the  holy  name  of  the  Lord  and  the  Supreme  Lord  Himself  are  identical,
descriptions  such  as  all-pervading,  all-powerful,  unlimited,  and  the  Supersoul,  are
befitting Him and no one else. All these adjectives describe the Lord’s transcendental
qualities, and are devoid of any mundane tinge. As a fiber is inseparable from the stem
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
494 Chapter 15
of a lotus, the Supreme Lord is inseparable from His holy name, and thus both the Lord
and His holy names are the objects of the liberated soul’s worship.
yathorëanäbhir hådayäd ürëäm udvamate mukhät
äkäçäd ghoñavän präëo manasä sparça-rüpiëä
chando-mayo ‘måta-mayaù sahasra-padavéà prabhuù
oàkäräd vyaïjita-sparça- svaroñmäntastha-bhüñitäm
vicitra-bhäñä-vitatäà chandobhiç catur-uttaraiù
ananta-päräà båhatéà såjaty äkñipate svayam
Just as a spider produces its web from its mouth, the Supreme Lord manifests Himself
as the primeval vital air, consisting of all the sacred Vedic meters and full of transcendental
pleasure. The Lord, from the sky of His heart, creates the unlimited Vedic sound through
the agency of His mind. The sound vibrations of the Vedas then spread in all directions,
adorned with the various letters, meters, consonants, vowels, and semi-vowels. The Vedas
are expressed in different meters, each having four more syllables than the previous one.
Ultimately, the Supreme Lord withdraws the unlimited and unfathomable manifestation
of Vedic sound within Himself.
COMMENTARY
Just as a spider brings forth its web from its heart and produces it through its mouth,
the plenary portion of the Supreme Lord, who is the source of Brahmä, manifests the
Vedic  knowledge  by  means  of  His  potency.  With  the  support  of  the  sky,  the  Vedic
knowledge, along with the vital life air, then enters the heart of Brahmä. The word ghoña
means  “sound.”  Transcendental  sound  vibration  in  the  form  of  the  Vedic  literature  is
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Explanation of the Vedic Path
thus revealed by the Supreme Lord in this way. It is the Supreme Lord and nothing else
that is to be realized by one’s study of the Vedas.
triñöub jagaty aticchando hy atyañöy-atijagad-viräö
The  Vedic  meters  are  Gäyatré,  Uñëik,  Anuñöup,  Båhaté,  Paìkti,  Triñöup,  Jagaté,
Aticchanda, Atyañöi, Atijagaté, and Ativiräö.
COMMENTARY
The Gäyatri meter has twenty-four syllables, and the Uñëik meter has twenty-eight
syllables. There are other meters, such as Atyañöi, Atijagaté, and Ativiräö, all of which
are defined in the Vedas.
kià vidhatte kim äcañöe kim anüdya vikalpayet
ity asyä hådayaà loke nänyo mad veda kaçcana
I am the actual knower of the Vedas, and it is Me that is to be known by the study
of  the  Vedas.  That  which  is  to  be  known,  that  which  is  prescribed,  and  that  which  is
actually revealed by the Vedas remains a mystery to the conditioned souls.
COMMENTARY
It is to be understood that whatever has been prescribed in the Vedas is meant for the
ultimate benefit of all living entities. There are so many individual opinions that answer
the question, “What is the actual purport of the Vedic statements? What do the Vedas
actually teach?” The Vedas teach that one should chant mantras three times a day, offer
oblations to the forefathers, and perform numerous other prescribed rituals and duties.
Does this mean that the Vedas simply encourage the living entities to perform fruitive
activities?  The  answer  is  that  all  Vedic  formulas  are  preliminary  stages  leading  to  the
perfect  stage  of  Kåñëa  consciousness,  in  which  one  fully  surrenders  to  the  devotional
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
496 Chapter 15
service of the Lord. There are various processes recommended in the Vedic literature,
such  as  karma-yoga,  jïäna-yoga,  and  bhakti-yoga.  All  these  processes  are  revealed  by
the Supreme Lord for the benefit of people having various qualifications. Foolish people
think that by following any of these processes one can attain the supreme perfection of
life. That is why in this verse the Supreme Lord says that it is He alone who knows the
actual purport of the Vedas.
PURPORT
Çré  Kåñëa  is  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  who  is  one  without  a  second.
No one other than the Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa knows the actual aim of the sacrifices
prescribed in the karma-käëòa section of the Vedas, the goal of the mantras that are
found in the upäsaëa-käëòa section of the Vedas, and the objective of the deliberations
of  the  jïäna-käëòa  section  of  the  Vedas.  The  demigods,  human  beings,  and  great
sages,  who  are  all  subordinate  to  the  Supreme  Lord  and  who  have  a  limited  capacity
for  transcendental  understanding,  cannot  find  out  the  actual  intention  of  the  Vedas.
The Supreme Absolute Truth is the Lord Himself, who is the only shelter of all living
entities, and who is the only objective of all kinds of Vedic processes.
mäà vidhatte ‘bhidhatte mäà vikalpyäpohyate tv aham
etävän sarva-vedärthaù çabda ästhäya mäà bhidäm
mäyä-mätram anüdyänte pratiñidhya prasédati
In  the  karma-käëòa,  the  Vedas  have  described  Me  as  the  goal  of  all  sacrifices,
and in the devatä-käëòa, the Supreme Lord of all kinds of worship. The jï äna-käëòa
elaborately  analyzes  all  material  duality  as  being  nothing  but  My  illusory  potency,  and
thus not separate from Me. The transcendental sound vibration thus establishes Me as
the essential meaning of all Vedic knowledge.
COMMENTARY
By all the Vedas the Supreme Lord is to be known. Devotional service is described
as being under the guidance of the internal potency of the Supreme Lord, and it is the
constitutional duty of the living entities. The recommendation to perform sacrifices is
meant to ultimately bring one to the platform of devotional service. It has been stated by
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Explanation of the Vedic Path
the Supreme Lord: “In the beginning of creation, I spoke the Vedic wisdom to Brahmä
and  thereafter,  it  became  known  as  bhägavata  dharma.  Indeed,  I  am  the  goal  of  the
Vedas.”
After  elaborately  propagating  the  various  paths  of  wisdom,  the  Vedas  concluded
that  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  is  the  ultimate  goal.  The  three  käëòas  of
the  Vedas  propagate  karma,  jïäna,  and  bhakti.  At  the  same  time,  it  has  refuted  the
path  of  karma,  as  well  as  the  path  of  jïäna,  or  the  cultivation  of  knowledge.  First,
the Vedas advocate that one renounce the performance of activities with attachment
for  the  results,  but  instead  engage  in  karma  without  any  material  desires.  By  such  a
practice, one gradually comes to the platform of jïäna, wherein one is advised to give
up all fruitive activities, even if performed without material desires. When one comes
to the platform of perfection of jïäna, one is advised to give up the very cultivation of
knowledge while attempting to merge into transcendence. However, it is to be carefully
noted that nowhere in any Vedic literature has it been advised that one should renounce
the devotional service of the Lord.
The  teachings  of  the  Vedas  are  based  on  the  idea  that  eventually,  everyone  must
come to the platform of devotional service to the Supreme Lord. It has been concluded
that the Supreme Lord is the ultimate shelter, and that the processes of karma and jïäna
are  by  nature  illusory.  The  performance  of  karma  takes  place  within  the  jurisdiction
of  the  three  modes  of  material  nature,  and  the  cultivation  of  knowledge  causes  one
to  be  situated  in  the  mode  of  goodness.  Therefore,  ultimately,  these  processes  are  to
be  abandoned  because  they  cannot  lead  one  to  the  platform  of  transcendence.  The
Vedas felt immense pleasure by describing the wonderfully sweet qualities of devotional
service, which is transcendental to the three modes of material nature. Indeed, it is the
desire of the Vedas that the conditioned soul may drown in the transcendentally sweet
mellows of devotional service.
PURPORT
The  sacrifices  that  are  prescribed  in  the  karma-käëòa  sections  of  the  Vedas  are
manifestations  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  The  ultimate  goal  of  all  kinds  of  activities  is
certainly to satisfy the Supreme Lord. A multitude of Vedic paths of advancement have
been promoted simply due to the conditioned souls’ lack of love for the Supreme Lord.
It is the Supreme Lord alone who is able to remove the coverings of ignorance from the
minds of the living entities. He is certainly the ultimate goal of all kinds of ritualistic
performances found in the Vedas.
In  this  material  world,  there  is  a  distinction  between  an  object  and  a  sound  that
represents it. Because ordinary sounds are under the jurisdiction of material time and
place, they are incompetent for ascertaining the nature of an object. The conditioned
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 15
uddhava-gétä
souls consider the objects that make up their material environment as meant for their
personal enjoyment. When a person gives up this materialistic conception as being the
enjoyer  of  all  he  surveys  and  becomes  inclined  toward  the  Lord’s  devotional  service,
the  distinction  between  an  object  and  the  sound  that  represents  it  is  vanquished.  At
that  time,  one  becomes  liberated  from  the  Lord’s  illusory  energy,  Maya,  and  obtains
engagement  in  the  transcendental  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  From  the  viewpoint
of enlightenment, it can be understood that with every syllable, the Vedas declare the
glories of the Supreme Lord and establish Him as the supreme worshipable object for all
classes of living beings.
Thus  end  the  translation  of  the  fifteenth  chapter  of  the  Uddhava-géta  entitled
“Explanation of the Vedic Path” with the commentaries of Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté
Öhäkura  and  chapter  summary  and  purports  by  Çréla  Bhaktisiddhänta  Sarasvaté
Öhäkura
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 16
enumeratIon of the eLements of materIaL CreatIon
CHAPTER SUMMARY
In this chapter there is a description of the material elements, the natures of male
and female, and birth and death.
Various philosophies categorize the material elements in different ways. Although
such differences are caused by the illusory energy of the Lord, they all are based on logic
and  are  therefore  acceptable.  The  material  elements  exist  in  all  situations  and  in  all
places and the insurmountable illusory energy of the Lord causes them to be understood
in various ways.
The  knowledge  acquired  by  the  perception  of  the  senses  can  determine,  to  some
extent,  the  material  elements,  but  can  never  penetrate  to  the  eternal  soul.  There  is  a
supreme  controller  of  nature,  and  He  is  also  the  supreme  enjoyer,  not  the  controlled
minute  individual  souls.  The  three  modes  of  material  nature  cause  the  conditioned
souls to appreciate different aspects of material nature. Those in the mode of goodness
appreciate  knowledge,  those  in  the  mode  of  passion  appreciate  activity,  and  those  in
the mode of ignorance appreciate foolishness. Time is a representation of the Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead, and the  original cause of material propensities is  the  mahat-
tattva.  In  this  chapter,  twenty-five  material  elements  are  innumerated:  the  Supreme
Lord, material nature, the mahat-tattva, false ego, ether, air, fire, water, earth, the eyes,
ears, nose, tongue, skin, speech, the hands, feet, genitals, anus, the mind, sound, touch,
form, taste, and smell.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
500 Chapter 16
In  the  beginning,  the  Lord  glaces  over  the  material  energy,  so  that  the  creation,
maintenance,  and  destruction  of  the  cosmic  manifestation  is  brought  into  existence,
under  the  control  of  the  Lord.  In  this  way,  there  is  a  distinction  made  between  the
puruña and prakåti, although, in one sense, they are non-different as cause and effect.
The universe is brought about by the interaction of the three modes of materal nature,
which  cause  matter  to  be  in  a  constant  state  of  transformation.  The  rebellious  living
beings are then forced to accept material bodies in the cosmic manifestation as a result
of their previous fruitive activites. Because his knowledge of his self is covered by the
illusory energy of the Lord, the conditioned soul cannot understand his actual position.
The subtle body, which is filled with desires for sense gratification, carries the helpless
conditioned soul from one body to another.
The body undergoes nine stages of transformation due to being under the control
of  the  three  modes  of  material  nature.  These  are  impregnation,  gestation  within
the  womb,  birth,  childhood,  youth,  maturity,  middle  age,  old  age,  and  finally  death.
From the death of one’s father and the birth of one’s child, one can understand the
temporary  nature  of  his  own  body.  The  conscious  self  is  distinct  from  the  material
body  it  identifies  with.  The  conditioned  soul  is  in  the  darkness  of  ignorance,  being
bewildered  by  the  objects  of  the  senses,  and  thus  he  achieves  various  destinations,
one after another, within the cosmic manifestation. In this way, the conditioned soul
wanders throughout the universe under the spell of material nature, sometimes residing
in heaven due to the predominance  of the mode of goodness, sometimes appearing in
human  society  due  the  predominance  of  the  mode  of  passion,  and  sometimes  being
forced into lower species of life due to the predominance of the mode of ignorance. The
eternal soul never directly contacts the objects of the senses, but only the senses of the
body. Therefore, the pleasure derived from material sense gratification is very limited
and  temporary.  Only  those  who  take  shelter  at  the  lotus  feet  of  the  Supreme  Lord,
dedicating themselves to His devotional service, attain peace, whereas all others, even
great  so-called  scholars,  are  tormented  by  the  insurmountable  influence  of  material
nature.
´Î3{H 3HÌ=
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Enumeration of the Elements of Material Creation
çré-uddhava uväca
kati tattväni viçveça saìkhyätäny åñibhiù prabho
navaikädaça païca tréëy ättha tvam iha çuçruma
kecit ñaò-viàçatià prähur apare païca-viàçatià
saptaike nava ñaö kecic catväry ekädaçäpare
kecit saptadaça prähuù ñoòaçaike trayodaça
etävattvaà hi saìkhyänäm åñayo yad-vivakñayä
gäyanti påthag äyuñmann idaà no vaktum arhasi
Uddhava  said:  My  dear  Lord,  O  master  of  the  universe,  how  have  the  great  sages
categorized  the  elements  of  the  material  nature?  I  have  heard  You  said  that  there  are
twenty-eight  elements:  the  supreme  controller,  the  spirit  soul,  the  mahat-tattva,  false
ego, the five gross elements, the ten knowledge-acquiring and working senses, the mind,
the five sense objects, and the three modes of nature. However, there are others who say
that there are twenty-six elements, while still others point out twenty-five, seven, nine,
six, four, or eleven elements, and even others who say that there are seventeen, sixteen,
or thirteen. How is it that great sages categorize the material elements in different ways?
Please describe to me so that I may correctly understand this.
COMMENTARY
After  hearing  the  Lord’s  explanation  of  karma  käëòa,  Çré  Uddhava  now  asks
about some details of the jïäna käëòa sections of the Vedas, desiring to gain a proper
understanding. There are innumerable sages who have established their own opinions
and while doing so, they have ascertained different numbers of material elements. This
is not actually contradictory because various philosophers have utilized various methods
of categorizing the same reality.
In these three verses, it is stated that some particular sage has ascertained that there
are nine elements— the Supreme Lord, the living entities, the mahat-tattva, false ego,
and  the  five  gross  material  elements.  However,  besides  these  there  are  ten  senses,  the
mind, the five sense objects, and the three modes of material nature, making a total of
twenty-eight  elements. The  word  äyuñman,  or  “possessing  eternal  form,”  is  significant
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
502 Chapter 16
in this regard. The Supreme Lord is eternal and full of knowledge of past, present, and
future, and so He is the original and perfect philosopher.
PURPORT
Different philosophers have given various opinions while enumerating the number
of material elements. In this verse, Uddhava states that it is the opinion of the Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead  that  there  are  twenty-eight  material  elements.  These  are  the
Supreme Lord, His energy, the intelligence, false ego, the five gross elements, the mind,
the five knowledge-acquiring senses, the five working senses, the five sense objects, and
the three modes of material nature.
The godless Säìkhya philosophers, who are averse to the Supreme Lord, ascertain
the number of material elements to be twenty-four. They do not accept the three modes
of material nature and the supreme controller. Atheistic speculation on reality does not
recognize  the  existence  of  God;  consequently  it  is  a  worthless  attempt  to  explain  the
truth.  The  Lord Himself empowers different living entities to speculate and speak  on
reality in different ways.
yuktaà ca santi sarvatra bhäñante brähmaëä yathä
mäyäà madéyäm udgåhya vadatäà kià nu durghaöam
Lord Kåñëa said: Because all the material elements pervade the entire creation, it is
justifiable  that  various  philosophers  have  categorized  them  in  different  ways.  All  these
learned men have worked under the influence of My mystic potency, thus seeing things
from various perspectives.
COMMENTARY
Although  there  seems  to  be  contradictions  in  the  statements  of  the  great  sages,
there is actually none. The Supreme Lord herein says that the words of the brähmaëas
are all reasonable. Each of the philosophers mentioned here reveals a particular aspect
of truth, and their theories are not contradictory because they are descriptions of the
same phenomena with different categorical systems. Having spoken under the shelter of
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Enumeration of the Elements of Material Creation
the Lord’s mystic potency, none of the sages could ascertain the truth perfectly. As long
as the sun and the moon remain, these differences of opinion will also continue to exist.
This is the purport of this verse.
naitad evaà yathättha tvaà yad ahaà vacmi tat tathä
evaà vivadatäà hetuà çaktayo me duratyayäù
When philosophers argue with one another, saying, “I have understood things in a
way superior to you,” this is simply a manifestation of My insurmountable energy.
COMMENTARY
By  the  influence  of  the  modes  of  goodness,  passion  and  ignorance,  different
philosophers  are  attracted  to  different  views;  and  by  the  influence  of  the  material
atmosphere  created  by  the  Lord,  these  philosophers  perpetually  disagree  with  one
another.  As stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam (6.4.31):
yac-chaktayo vadatäà vädinäà vai viväda-saàväda-bhuvo bhavanti
kurvanti caiñäà muhur ätma-mohaà tasmai namo ‘nanta-guëäya bhümne
“Let  me  offer  my  respectful  obeisances  unto  the  all-pervading  Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who possesses unlimited transcendental qualities. Acting
from  within  the  cores  of  the  hearts  of  all  philosophers,  who  propagate  various
views, He caused them to forget their own souls while sometimes agreeing and
sometimes disagreeing among themselves. Thus He creates within this material
world a situation in which they are unable to come to a conclusion. I offer my
respectful obeisances unto Him.”
yäsäà vyatikaräd äséd vikalpo vadatäà padam
präpte çama-dame ‘pyeti vädas tam anu çämyati
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
504 Chapter 16
It is by the interaction of My energies that different opinions arise. However, for those
who have fixed their intelligence on Me, and who have controlled their senses, differences
of perception disappear so that the very cause for argument is removed.
COMMENTARY
Conflicting  perceptions  in  the  minds  of  various  mundane  philosophers  is  created
by  the  Lord’s  external  energy.  Although  deluded  by  the  Lord’s  illusory  energy,  each
philosopher thinks that he is correct, saying, “It may be like this and it may be like that.”
Although  such  thinking  is  surely  rational,  because  of  a  limited  view  of  reality,  each
philosopher  argues  and  counter-argues  without  ever  coming  to  a  definite  conclusion.
Such  quarreling  is  absent  in  the  society  of  devotees,  who  accept  the  authority  of  the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  whose  vision  is  not  limited,  and  who  is  not  under
the influence of the illusory energy. Being enlightened in the truth, the devotees of the
Lord are in complete agreement. Even if by chance there appears to be some differences
in  opinion,  this  is  not  because  the  devotees  are  under  the  influence  of  false  ego.  On
the  transcendental  platform,  there  are  also  varieties  of  perception  according  to  one’s
particular relationship with the Lord.
parasparänupraveçät tattvänäà puruñarñabha
paurväparya-prasaìkhyänaà yathä vaktur vivakñitam
O best among men, since the subtle and gross material elements are situated within
one another, various philosophers estimate their number differently.
COMMENTARY
The  creation  of  the  universe  is  enacted  from  subtle  to  gross,  as  an  effect  of  the
inconceivable potency of the Lord. The cause is present in the effect, and so the effect
is also subtly present in the cause. Considering this, it is concluded that all the elements
are present in each element. It is for this reason that the elements of material nature
can be categorized in various ways. That materialistic philosophers speculate according
to their own propensities and limitations, they each consider their own conlusions to be
the best. This is being described in these two verses.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Enumeration of the Elements of Material Creation
ekasminn api dåçyante praviñöänétaräëi ca
pürvasmin vä parasmin vä tattve tattväni sarvaçaù
The  subtle  material  elements  are  present  within  their  transformations,  the  gross
elements, and the gross material elements are present in their subtle causes. This is true
because creation is enacted from subtle to gross in a series of transformations. For this
reason, all the material elements are present in each element.
COMMENTARY
The  example  can  be  given  that  within  clay,  the  potentiality  for  a  claypot  exists,
just as the presence of clay is within the pot. In this way, all of the material elements
are present within each element, and ultimately, all elements have as their shelter the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
paurväparyam ato ‘méñäà prasaìkhyänam abhépsatäm
yathä viviktaà yad-vaktraà gåhëémo yukti-sambhavät
Therefore,  regardless  of  the  particular  philosopher  and  his  means  of  calculation,
whether he includes material elements within their previous subtle causes or subsequent
manifest products, I accept their conclusions as authoritative because a logical explanation
can always be given for all such theories.
COMMENTARY
Even  though  materialistic  philosophers  rationally  describe  the  universe  from
varying perceptions, they can never come to an ultimate understanding without hearing
from the Lord or His representative. One should therefore not be proud of his limited
intelligence, just because he has some partial understanding of material existence.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
506 Chapter 16
PURPORT
Due to misuse of their minute independence, even expert living entities come under
the control of perpetual ignorance and thus enter into perpetual conflicts and arguments.
One  who  does  not  misuse  his  good  intelligence  and  is  devoid  of  the  propensity  for
material enjoyment is certainly a candidate for the pure devotional service of the Lord.
Such  a  devotee  can  enlighten  the  entire  world  with  the  understanding  of  devotional
service to the Supreme Lord. On the other hand, if a blind person guides another blind
person,  both  will  fall  into  a  ditch.  Non-devotees,  such  as  the  karmés  and  jïänés,  can
never impart perfect knowledge for the simple reason that they are not self-realized.
anädy-avidyä-yuktasya puruñasyätma-vedanam
svato na sambhaväd anyas tattva-jïo jïäna-do bhavet
Because the conditioned souls, who have been covered by the illusory energy of the
Lord since time immemorial, cannot effect their own liberation, there must be someone
else possessing pure knowledge who can free him from materal entanglement.
COMMENTARY
Uddhava explained how some materialistic philosophers see twenty-five categories
of  elements,  whereas  others  see  twenty-six.  Generally,  this  distinction  is  caused  by  a
difference  in  spiritual  understanding.  Some  see  the  individual  soul  and  the  Supreme
Soul to be one and the same and so they count twenty-five, whereas others recognize
the  distinction  between  the  one  Supreme  Lord  and  the  many  minute  living  entities
maintained by the one Lord, and so they count twenty-six. The sixth dative case in this
verse should be understood as the first dative case. Because the conditioned souls forgot
their  constitutional  position,  it  is  the  omniscient  Supreme  Lord  who  can  revive  their
original nature by imparting to them the knowledge of the self. This is the opinion of
all the Vaiñëava authorities.
PURPORT
Those  whose  only  means  for  acquiring  knowledge  is  their  mundane  experience
are unable to realize the transcendental Supreme Personality of Godhead, along with
His eternal variegatedness. As a result of their mundane conceptions, such empiricists
preach the philosophy of impersonalism while internally remaining sense enjoyers and
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Enumeration of the Elements of Material Creation
externally displaying renunciation. These conditioned souls, instead of understanding
themselves as minute individual spirit souls, believe themselves to be the all-pervading
Supersoul.  And  yet,  in  spite  of  such  pretensions,  such  mundane  philosophers  cannot
escape the duality of lamentation and illusion. Because of rejecting their subordination
to the Supreme Lord, they forever remain within the darkness of ignorance. However, if
such unfortunate souls somehow take to devotional service, then all their inauspiciousness
can be destroyed. When they understand that the Supreme Lord is the only enjoyer and
the original source of everything, they can simultaneously realize themselves as minute
particles of spirit that are the Lord’s eternal servants.
puruñeçvarayor atra na vailakñaëyam aëv api
tad-anya-kalpanäpärthä jïänaà ca prakåter guëaù
Knowledge in the mode of goodness is characterized by the understanding that there
is no qualitative difference between the Supreme Lord and the living entities. Those who
imagine a qualitative difference between them are misguided.
COMMENTARY
Can the statement that there are twenty-five elements be accepted? This question is
answered by the Lord in this verse. Although the individual spirit soul and the Supersoul
are  distinct  entities,  there  is  no  qualitative  difference  between  them.  The  difference
between the Supreme Lord and the living entities is that the Supreme Lord is infinite
whereas the living entities are infinitesimal. The Supreme Lord is the energetic source
of all energies and the living entities are one of His energies. This establishes the proper
understanding  that  the  Supreme  Lord  and  the  living  entities  are  simultaneously  one
with  and  different  from  each  other.  Any  philosophical  attempt  to  separate  the  living
entity from the Supreme Lord and deny his eternal servitude to the Lord is thus refuted.
Speculation arriving at the conclusion that the living entity has independent existence
separate from the Lord is described here as apärthä, or useless.
PURPORT
Generally, materialists have some kind of a belief in God but because they identify
with  the  material  body  as  the  self,  they  cannot  appreciate  the  qualitative  oneness  of
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
508 Chapter 16
the Lord and the living beings. For this reason, genuine understanding of the Absolute
Truth must begin from the understanding of the spiritual quality of the living entities,
as  distinct  from  the  bodily  concept  of  life.  Lord  Caitanya  has  described  the  truth  as
acintya-bhedäbheda-tattva—that  the  Lord  and  the  living  entities  are  simultaneously
one  and  different.  When  one  cultivates  the  mode  of  goodness,  this  understanding
develops,  and  by  further  advancement  in  devotional  service,  one  can  understand  the
variegatedness of spiritual existence.
prakåtir guëa-sämyaà vai prakåter nätmano guëäù
sattvaà rajas tama iti sthity-utpatty-anta-hetavaù
Nature originally exists in a state of equilibrium of the three modes of material nature.
When these modes are agitated, then the creation, maintenance, and dissolution of the
universe takes place. Such events occur within the external energy of the Lord, and do
not pertain to the eternal spirit souls.
COMMENTARY
Although the spirit souls are counted as the superior energy of  the Lord, they are
very tiny and thus subject to the influence of the inferior, external energy of the Lord.
In their original state, the three modes of material nature are in equilibrium, and later,
when  material  nature  is  agitated  by  the  glance  of  the  Lord,  creation  of  the  universe
takes place, wherein the conditioned souls are bound up. These conditioned souls are
not actually the doers of activities within the cosmic manifestation. While conditioned
by  the  modes  of  nature,  the  living  entities  experience  various  conditions  of  life.  The
mode of goodness allows one to cultivate knowledge, the mode of passion allows one to
work very hard, and the mode of ignorance allows one to act foolishly. However, these
qualitative distinctions have no actual relation to the spirit souls, whose actual qualities
are  that  they  are  eternal,  full  of  knowledge,  and  fully  blissful.  In  the  original  state  of
material nature, the three material modes are in equilibrium. These material qualities
are the causes of the creation, maintenance, and destruction of the cosmic manifestation
and the spirit soul has nothing to do with them.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Enumeration of the Elements of Material Creation
PURPORT
The  three  modes  of  material  nature—goodness,  passion,  and  ignorance—are  the
causes of the creation, maintenance, and annihilation of the material world. Unlike the
material  nature,  the  spirit  soul  has  no  material  qualities.  In  the  original  condition  of
material nature, there is equilibrium of the three modes of material nature. The material
modes  have  no  access  within  the  kingdom  of  God,  in  the  unbounded  atmosphere  of
which  the  eternal  living  entity  is  meant  to  live.  There,  the  spiritual  energies,  which
are known as hlädiné, sandhiné, and saàvit are present. In the spiritual world, there is
no question of creation caused by the influence of time because in that transcendental
abode, time is eternally present.
sattvaà jïänaà rajaù karma tamo ‘jïänam ihocyate
guëa-vyatikaraù kälaù svabhävaù sütram eva ca
Knowledge is the characteristic of the mode of goodness, activities are the characteristic
of the mode of passion, and ignorance is the characteristic of the mode of darkness. Time
is the product of the agitation of the three modes of material nature, and the sum total of
the conditioned souls’ propensities is embodied within the mahat-tattva.
COMMENTARY
Knowledge can be derived from cultivation of the mode of goodness, thus leading
one towards the Absolute Truth. Fruitive activities are born from the mode of passion
and the state of being devoid of knowledge is born from the mode of ignorance. These
characteristics  of  the  material  nature  are  found  in  the  conditioned  souls  who  are
being  forced  to  exist  under  material  designations.  Käla,  or  time,  by  which  the  three
modes of material nature are agitated, is the impetus for the interaction of the material
elements.
PURPORT
It  is  generally  understood  that  knowledge  is  produced  by  the  material  quality  of
goodness, fruitive activities are enacted by the material quality of passion, and ignorance
is the result of the material quality of darkness. Although there are numerous divisions
of material elements within the basic divisions, the spirit soul is always to be understood
as a distinct transcendental element.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
510 Chapter 16
puruñaù prakåtir vyaktam ahaìkäro nabho ‘nilaù
jyotir äpaù kñitir iti tattväny uktäni me nava
I  have  thus  described  the  nine  basic  truths  as  the  spirit  soul,  nature,  the  mahat-
tattva, false ego, sky, air, fire, water, and earth.
COMMENTARY
In this and the next two verses, the Supreme Lord elucidates the twenty-five material
elements. The word vyakta here refers to the mahat-tattva.
PURPORT
The nine elements— the spirit soul, nature, the material ingredients, false ego, and
the  five  gross  elements  are  here  described  as  tattva,  or  truth.  The  material  nature  is
originally unmanifest and later on, when it is manifest, it is known as mahat-tattva.
çrotraà tvag darçanaà ghräëo jihveti jïäna-çaktayaù
väk-päëy-upastha-päyv-aìghriù karmäëy aìgobhayaà manaù
My  dear  Uddhava,  the  ears,  skin,  eyes,  nose,  and  tongue  are  the  five  knowledge-
acquiring senses. The speech, hands, legs, anus, and genitals are the five working senses.
The mind belongs to both these categories.
COMMENTARY
The  word  darçana  means  “eyes.”  The  five  knowledge-acquiring  senses,  the  five
working senses and the mind constitute eleven elements mentioned in this verse.
PURPORT
The five knowledge-acquiring senses, the five working senses, and the mind, which
is the director of both sets of senses, are known as eleven truths.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Enumeration of the Elements of Material Creation
çabdaù sparço raso gandho rüpaà cety artha-jätayaù
gaty-ukty-utsarga-çilpäni karmäyatana-siddhayaù
Sound, touch, form, taste and smell are the objects of the knowledge-acquiring senses.
By their transformation, the five gross material elements are created. Movement, speech,
excretion, and manufacture are functions of the working senses.
COMMENTARY
The  objects  of  the  knowledge-acquiring  senses  are  five.  Thus,  the  Lord  has
enumerated  twenty-five  elements.  Activities,  such  as  speaking,  moving  about,  passing
stool,  passing  urine,  and  performing  artistic  work  are  the  propensities  of  the  working
senses and as such, they should not be considered a separate truth.
PURPORT
The objects of the senses are sound, touch, form, taste, and smell. Activities, such as
speaking, movement with the help of the legs, artistic work performed with the hands,
and  the  releasing  of  bodily  waste  through  the  anus  and  genital  are  the  objects  of  the
five working senses. By counting these activities of the working senses as one, the total
becomes twenty-six.
sargädau prakåtir hy asya kärya-käraëa-rüpiëé
sattvädibhir guëair dhatte puruño ‘vyakta ékñate
In the beginning of creation, the material nature, which consists of cause and effect,
by  means  of  the  modes  of  goodness,  passion,  and  ignorance,  assumes  its  form  as  the
embodiment of all subtle causes and gross manifestations. The Supreme Lord, who never
changes His position, simply glances over material nature and remains the witness.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
512 Chapter 16
COMMENTARY
In the beginning of the material creation, material nature creates with the help of
her three modes, goodness, passion, and ignorance. The Supreme Lord remains in His
transcendental position, unaffected by the actions and reactions of the gross and subtle
material elements. Therefore, the Lord is referred to as avyakta, or never manifest within
the  material  creation.  No  matter  in  which  way  the  material  elements  are  categorized,
it  must  be  understood  that  the  Supreme  Lord  is  the  ultimate  cause  of  the  creation,
maintenance, and destruction of the cosmic manifestation.
PURPORT
The  external  energy  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  which  manifests  as  cause  and  effect,
employs  her  three  modes  to  perform  the  activities  of  the  material  world’s  creation,
maintenance, and annihilation. The Lord personally remains unchanged as He agitates
the material nature through His glance to initiate creation.
vyaktädäyo vikurväëä dhätavaù puruñekñayä
labdha-véryäù såjanty aëòaà saàhatäù prakåter balät
As  the  material  elements  undergo  transformations,  they  are  empowered  with  their
particular  potencies  by  the  glance  of  the  Lord,  so  that  they  are  able  to  manifest  the
universal egg.
COMMENTARY
The universe is created from the transformation of the total material ingredients,
called the mahat-tattva. Under the shelter of material nature, these ingredients bring
about the creation of the cosmic manifestation.
saptaiva dhätava iti taträrthäù païca khädayaù
jïänam ätmobhayädhäras tato dehendriyäsavaù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Enumeration of the Elements of Material Creation
According to some philosophers, there are seven elements—earth, water, fire, air, and
ether, along with the minute spirit soul and the Supreme Soul, who is the basis of both
the material elements and the infinitesimal spirit soul. According to this theory, the body,
senses, life air, and all material phenomena are produced from these seven elements.
COMMENTARY
The  word  dhätu  in  this  context  means  “truth,”  or  “element.”  The  word  jïäna  in
this verse refers to the living entity. These seven elements are the source of all material
ingredients, beginning from the sky.
PURPORT
Those philosophers who propound the theory of seven truths accept the five gross
material  elements,  along  with  the  living  entity  and  the  Supersoul,  to  be  the  seven
primary elements. They say that from these elements, the material body, the senses, and
all other objects have become manifest.
ñaò ity aträpi bhütäni païca ñañöhaù paraù pumän
tair yuita ätma-sambhütaiù såñövedaà samapäviçat
There are others who say that there are six elements—the five gross material elements
and the Supersoul. According to them, the Supersoul creates the universe with the help of
the elements that He has brought forth from Himself and then enters within it.
COMMENTARY
There  are  other  philosophers  that  state  that  there  are  six  principle  truths,  which
include the five material elements and the Supersoul.
PURPORT
The philosophy of six truths takes consideration of the five material elements and
the Supersoul.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
514 Chapter 16
catväry eveti taträpi teja äpo ‘nnam ätmanaù
jätäni tair idaà jätaà janmävayavinaù khalu
Some philosophers say that there are four elements, and that of these four, fire, water,
and earth are created from the self, the fourth element. After manifesting, these elements
combine to form the universe.
COMMENTARY
The word anna in this verse means “earth,” the word ätmä means “the Supersoul,”
who is the source of the material ingredients.
PURPORT
The philosophers who propose that there are four truths accept fire, water, earth,
and the self to be the causes of the cosmic manifestation.
saìkhyäne saptadaçake bhüta-mätrendriyäëi ca
païca païcaika-manasä ätmä saptadaçaù småtaù
Some  calculate  the  existence  of  seventeen  basic  elements—the  five  gross  material
elements, the five sense objects, the five senses, the mind, and the self.
COMMENTARY
The seventeen truths propounded by some philosophers are the five gross material
elements, the five sense objects, the five senses, the mind, and the self.
PURPORT
There are others who propagate the philosophy of seventeen basic truths—the five
gross material elements, the five sense objects, the five senses, the mind, and the self.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Enumeration of the Elements of Material Creation
tadvat ñoòaça-saìkhyäne ätmaiva mana ucyate
bhütendriyäëi païcaiva mana ätmä trayodaça
Philosophers that perceive sixteen elements differ from the previous conception only
because the self is identified with the mind. Others perceive thirteen elements—the five
gross elements, the five senses, the mind, the soul, and the Supreme Soul.
COMMENTARY
The soul is often addressed as the mind. In the philosophy of thirteen basic truths,
the five gross elements and the five sense objects are all together counted as five, and in
addition there are the five senses, the mind, the spirit soul, and the Supersoul.
PURPORT
Those  who  preach  the  philosophy  of  sixteen  basic  truths  consider  the  soul  and
the  mind  to  be  one  and  the  same.  Those  who  propagate  the  philosophy  of  thirteen
basic elements count the five gross elements and the five sense objects as five in all. In
addition, they count the five senses, the mind, the spirit soul, and the Supersoul.
ekädaçatva ätmäsau mahä-bhütendriyäëi ca
añöau prakåtayaç caiva puruñaç ca navety atha
According to some philosophers, there are eleven basic truths—the five gross elements,
the five senses, and the soul. There are others who propound the conception of nine basic
truths—the five gross elements, the mind, intelligence, false ego, and the soul.
COMMENTARY
The  propounders  of  eleven  basic  truths  count  the  ten  senses  and  the  soul.  Those
who advocate the philosophy of eight basic truths count the five gross elements, mind,
intelligence,  and  false  ego.  Those  who  advocate  the  philosophy  of  nine  basic  truths
accept these eight, as well as the soul.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
516 Chapter 16
iti nänä-prasaìkhyänaà tattvänäm åñibhiù kåtam
sarvaà nyäyyaà yuktimattväd viduñäà kim açobhanam
Thus,  philosophers  have  categorized  the  material  elements  in  various  ways.  All  of
these categorizations are based upon logic and reason and certainly exhibit great dexterity
of intelligence.
COMMENTARY
By using the word iti Çré Kåñëa indicates that He is concluding His explanation to
Uddhava about the various estimates of material elements.
´Î3{H 3HÌ=
çré-uddhava uväca
prakåtiù puruñaç cobhau yady apy ätma-vilakñaëau
anyonyäpäçrayät kåñëa dåçyate na bhidä tayoù
prakåtau lakñyate hy ätmä prakåtiç ca tathätmani
Çré Uddhava said: I have understood that the living entities and material nature are
distinct existences, and yet they appear to be inextricably connected. After all, the living
beings are embodied by matter and follow the ways of the modes of nature.
COMMENTARY
Uddhava is now expressing another doubt. The material nature is considered to be
prakåti whereas the living entity and the Supreme Lord are described as puruña, or the
enjoyer of nature. It may appear difficult to discriminate between the living entity and
his embodiment, or the Supreme Lord and His energy. Such distinctions must therefore
be seen through the eyes of the scriptures.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Enumeration of the Elements of Material Creation
PURPORT
In this material world, it appears as if life cannot exist independently of the material
body. Indeed, the living entity and material nature appear to be inseparable, from the time
of conception within the mother’s womb, right up to the time of death. In conditional
life,  we  cannot  imagine  how  life  can  be  a  separate  entity,  without  dependence  upon
matter  for  its  manifestation.  Of  course,  the  material  body  cannot  exist  without  the
presence  of  the  spirit  soul  and  thus  there  appears  to  be  a  mutual  dependence.  Here,
Uddhava wants the Lord to clarify all these.
evaà me puëòarékäkña mahäntaà saàçayaà hådi
chettum arhasi sarva-jïa vacobhir naya-naipuëaiù
O lotus-eyed Lord, O omniscient one, please remove this doubt from my heart with
Your words, which exhibit Your great skill in reasoning.
COMMENTARY
Çré Uddhava said: Kindly remove my doubt by demonstrating how the material body
is distinct from the soul, and how material nature is separate from the Supersoul. You
can certainly do so because You are the most expert in reasoning and arguments.
tvatto jïänaà hi jévänäà pramoñas te ‘tra çaktitaù
tvam eva hy ätma-mäyäyä gatià vettha na cäparaù
It is by Your mercy that the living entities obtain knowledge, and it is by Your illusory
energy that they fall from knowledge. I believe that no one but You can actually understand
how Your illusory energy works.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
518 Chapter 16
COMMENTARY
Uddhava said: You are the source of all knowledge and so it is by Your mercy that a
living entity can obtain knowledge. Your energy, vidyä, awards one knowledge and Your
energy, avidyä, takes away that knowledge.
PURPORT
Uddhava  further  inquired:  By  accepting  subordination  to  the  Supreme  Lord,  the
living entities obtain knowledge. The bewildering potency of the Lord creates illusion
in the minds of the rebellious living entities. Mäyä-devé exists under the shelter of the
Supreme Lord and she manifests her potency in two ways—the covering potency and
the throwing potency. Those who are under the influence of the Lord’s illusory energy
cannot understand how they are being conditioned.
çré-bhagavän uväca
prakåtiù puruñaç ceti vikalpaù puruñarñabha
eña vaikärikaù sargo guëa-vyatikarätmakaù
The  Supreme  Lord  said:  O  best  among  men,  there  is  distinct  difference  between
material  nature  and  the  living  entities  and  the  Supreme  Lord.  This  manifest  universe
undergoes  constant  transformation,  being  acted  upon  by  the  agitation  of  the  modes  of
nature.
COMMENTARY
Material nature is subject to change, but the Supreme Lord is always unchangeable.
Nature is manifold but the Supreme Lord is one without a second. Nature is dependent
but the Supreme Lord is fully independent. Material nature is manifested with the help
of others, whereas the Supreme Lord is self-manifested. In these ways, there are many
differences between the material nature and the Supreme Lord. Such distinctions are
being described in these four verses. The word vikalpa means “difference.” The Supreme
Lord is certainly distinct from His energy. Material bodies are products of the material
nature, and all material forms are subject to transformation, being agitated by the three
modes of material nature.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Enumeration of the Elements of Material Creation
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is unchanging whereas the material nature is always subject to
change.  There  is  a  manifestation  of  temporary  variegatedness  in  this  world  produced
by  the  illusory  energy  of  the  Lord  because  of  the  combination  of  the  three  modes  of
material  nature.  Although  the  material  world  is  limited  and  temporary,  the  spiritual
world, which is far beyond the material world, is full of eternal variegatedness created by
the spiritual nature. In that realm, nothing is agitated or influenced by the three modes
of material nature, being fully transcendental and eternal. In the transcendental abode
of the Lord, there are eternal variegated pastimes of the object of service, the Supreme
Lord, and the devotees of the Lord, based on loving devotional service. Because there
is complete harmony in diversity in the spiritual world, there is no conflict of interest.
Instead of the creation, maintenance, and annihilation that characterizes the material
manifestation, there is eternity, full knowledge, and bliss.
mamäìga mäyä guëa-mayy anekadhä vikalpa-buddhéç ca guëair vidhatte
vaikärikas tri-vidho ‘dhyätmam ekam athädhidaivam adhibhütam anyat
My dear Uddhava, My material energy, consisting of three modes by which it acts,
manifests  the  varieties  of  creation  along  with  varieties  of  consciousness  for  perceiving
them.  The  resultant  cosmic  manifestation  can  be  understood  in  these  three  aspects—
adhyätmic, adhidaivic, and adhibhautic.
COMMENTARY
The  diversity  of  nature  is  described  herein.  The  various  types  of  consciousness
within the different material bodies reveals different aspects of the Lord’s creation. The
seemingly endless varities of material consciousness are created by the transformation
of  the  three  modes  of  material  nature.  In  this  way,  the  multi-faceted  material  nature
transforms  into  many  categories,  but  can  be  simply  understood  in  three  divisions—
ädhyätmika, adhibhuta, and adhidaiva.
PURPORT
The external energy of the Lord manifests in three modes and by their interaction,
all  varieties  of  material  manifestations  take  place.  Creation,  maintenance,  and
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
520 Chapter 16
dissolution, are the three phases of material manifestation and these are understood in
three aspects—adhyätmika, ädhidaivika, and ädhibhautika. The Lord’s internal energy
is without any tinge of the material qualities, but is manifest in three features—sandhini,
samvit, and hlädiné.
dåg rüpam ärkaà vapur atra randhre parasparaà sidhyati yaù svataù khe
ätmä yad eñäm aparo ya ädyaù svayänubhütyäkhila-siddha-siddhiù
The eyes of the living entities represent the adhyätma feature of nature, the object of
vision represents the adhibhuta feature, and the light provided by the sun represents the
adhidaiva feature. These three features work together to reveal one another but the sun
in the sky is self-manifested. Similarly, the Supersoul is the original cause of the three
features—adhyätmic, adhibhautic, and adhidaivic—but is self-sufficient, acting by the
illumination of His own transcendental existence as the ultimate source of manifestation
of all created objects.
COMMENTARY
The function of the eye is to recognize form and so when there is recognition of form,
the eye’s presence is understood. The perception of form by the eye also depends upon
light, which is supplied by the demigods, who are in charge of universal management.
The demigods also depend upon those who they control, the members of human society,
and thus there are three interdependent factors to be considered: adhyätma, represented
by the senses; adhibhüta, represented by the sense objects; and adhidaiva, represented
by  the  demigods.  However,  the  Supersoul  exists  independently  from  all  such  created
existences.  The  example  is  given  of  how  the  sun  is  situated  in  its  orbit  without  any
extraneous help. In this way, the Supersoul can be compared to that sun because He is
the original cause of all material manifestations and yet is independent of them. He is
self-illuminated by His own glories and He enlightens all other illuminating agents. Yet
He always remains aloof.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Enumeration of the Elements of Material Creation
evaà tvag-ädi çravaëädi cakñur
jihvädi näsädi ca citta-yuktam
Similarly, the skin’s object of perception is touch and Väyu is its controlling deity. The
ear’s object of perception is sound and the demigods of the directions are the controlling
deities. The tongue’s object of perception is taste and Varuëa is the controlling deity. The
nose’s  object  of  perception  is  aroma  and  the  twin  Açviné-kumäras  are  the  controlling
deities.  The  mind’s  object  of  perception  is  thoughts  and  feelings  and  the  moon-god  is
the controlling deity. Intelligence is the power of discrimination and Lord Brahmä is the
controlling deity. False ego manifests pride and Lord Rudra is the controlling deity.
COMMENTARY
Each sense has its object of perception and its controlling diety. In this way, there
is an interdependence of these three features of the material manifestation. The skin’s
object  of  perception  is  touch  and  Väyu  is  the  controlling  deity.  The  ears’  object  of
perception is sound and the demigods of the directions are its controlling deities. The
tongue’s object of perception is taste and Varuëa is the controlling diety. Aroma is the
object of perception of the nose and the twin Açviné-kumäras are its controlling deities.
The mind’s object of perception is thinking and the moon-god is its controlling deity.
The power of discrimination is the object of perception of intelligence and its controlling
deity is Brahmä. Pride is the object of perception of false ego and its controlling deity
is Rudra.
PURPORT
In  the  material  world,  sight,  that  which  is  seen,  and  the  seer  represent  the  three
features  of  adhyätma,  adhibhuta,  and  adhidaiva.  There  is  no  possibility  of  any  sense
perception without the co-operation of these three. The eternal  soul  does not have a
factual relationship with the three interdependent functions: the senses, sense objects,
and the demigods. There is thus a gulf of difference between the material and spiritual
manifestations. As explained by the philosophy of acintya-bhedäbheda, although there is
distinction between matter and spirit, there is oneness as well due to the relationship of
cause and effect. Absolute oneness can never be supported. In the material manifestation,
variegatedness  produces  many  abominable  conditions  whereas  in  the  spiritual  world,
there are simply varieties of blissful existence.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
522 Chapter 16
yo ‘sau guëa-kñobha-kåto vikäraù pradhäna-mülän mahataù prasütaù
ahaà tri-vån moha-vikalpa-hetur vaikärikas tämasa aindriyaç ca
The Supreme Personality of Godhead in His form as time agitates the three modes
of  material  nature.  The  total  material  ingredients,  or  mahat-tattva,  thus  gives  rise  to
the false ego, which is the cause of the three kinds of illusion—vaikärika, tämasa, and
aindriya.
COMMENTARY
The cosmic manifestation is the result of the agitation of the three modes of material
nature.  False  ego,  which  is  born  from  the  mahat-tattva,  has  three  features,  known  as
vaikärikam,  tämasa,  and  indriyaja.  It  is  this  illusion  or  ignorance  that  causes  one  to
think that the cosmic manifestation is ultimate reality.
PURPORT
Due to the agitation of the three modes of material nature, the cosmic manifestation
comes into being as a transformation of the total material energy, and thus the conditioned
souls are put into a condition of birth and death. If the conditioned souls give up their
false  identification  with  matter  by  accepting  their  real  identity  as  the  Lord’s  eternal
servants, they can revive their dormant original consciousness. Here, the word moha-
vikalpa-hetuù indicates that false ego causes one to think of himself as the enjoyer of
material  nature,  thus  making  him  undergo  conditions  of  happiness  and  distress.  This
false ego can only be overcome by accepting the real ego as the Lord’s eternal servitor.
ätmäparijïäna-mayo vivädo hy astéti nästéti bhidärtha-niñöhaù
vyartho ‘pi naivoparameta puàsäà mattaù parävåtta-dhiyäà sva-lokät
The speculative debates of mundane philosophers who argue, “This world is real,”
“No, it is not real,” is based upon incomplete knowledge of the Supreme Lord and cannot
go beyond understanding the actions of the material dualities. Although such arguments
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Enumeration of the Elements of Material Creation
are  useless,  those  who  have  turned  their  attention  away  from  Me,  their  true  Self,  are
unable to give them up.
COMMENTARY
Learned scholars are the ones who are supposed to be capable of removing all of one’s
doubts.  However,  even  such  philosophers  are  doubtful  about  the  nature  of  existence.
Some  philosophers  try  to  establish,  by  means  of  reasoning  and  arguments,  that  the
material  world  is  real.  Then  there  are  others  who  try  to  prove  through  speculative
arguments that this world is false. For this reason, there is constant debate and doubt
within the minds of all the mundane scholars. Such controversy is simply due to a lack
of information about the Supreme Lord. When one realizes the self and Supreme Self,
there  is  no  longer  any  question  of  dispute.  Duality  is  experienced  when  one  accepts
something other than the Supreme Lord as life’s ultimate goal.
Atheists, who have no faith in the existence of the Lord, put forward various theories
saying that this world is not real and has no foundation in truth. On the other hand,
those  who  have  realized  the  existence  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  never
doubt  the  reality  of  the  universe  because  they  know  it  to  be  an  emanation  from  the
Absolute Truth. Without understanding the Supreme Absolute Truth, one will never be
able to ascertain the truth of the material nature.
The speculations of materially conditioned philosophers can never reach a conclusion
until they take shelter of the Lord. The devotees avoid useless arguments in this regard
because they are satisfied with the understanding presented by the Lord Himself.
PURPORT
One whose intelligence is under the influence of illusion falls into the pool of duality
and invites the mentality of accepting something and rejecting something else. In such
a condition, one doubts the very reality of his existence, and that of the world. Having
fallen under the control of the Lord’s external energy due to being bereft of the Lord’s
service, the conditioned souls become doubtful of the reality of the cosmic manifestation
and thus take to the path of dry arguments. As a result of their own karma, and while
praising the three modes of material nature, they become subject to higher and lower
births, as well as lamentation, illusion, and so on.
´Î3{H 3HÌ=
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
524 Chapter 16
çré-uddhava uväca
tvattaù parävåtta-dhiyaù sva-kåtaiù karmabhiù prabho
uccävacän yathä dehän gåhëanti visåjanti ca
tan mamäkhyähi govinda durvibhävyam anätmabhiù
na hy etat präyaço loke vidväàsaù santi vaïcitäù
Çré Uddhava said: O Lord Govinda, please explain to me how those who are averse to
understanding the Absolute Truth accept and then give up different kinds of higher and
lower bodies as a result of their fruitive activities. This is very difficult for the ignorant
people of this world, who are cheated by illusion, to understand.
COMMENTARY
If one’s intelligence is opposed to the devotional service of the Supreme Lord, then
all  one’s  activities  simply  create  material  bondage.  As  a  result  of  engaging  in  fruitive
activities, one is forced to accept higher and lower bodies and give them up when their
allotted duration of life is over. This is the case for those who are averse to the Supreme
Lord. No one can be considered intelligent without understanding the science of God,
which includes a description of the negative results of those who have forgotten their
eternal  relationship  with  Him.  There  are  many  so-called  wise  men  in  the  world,  but
although considering themselves to be most intelligent, they generally do not surrender
to the supreme intelligence of the Lord.
PURPORT
When the living entities fall down from the Lord’s service and embrace Maya, they
become dependent upon others for survival. Being conditioned by the external energy
of the Lord, they become falsely proud, thinking themselves to be the doers of activities,
and thus they are forced to suffer or enjoy the results. Due to aversion to the Supreme
Lord,  the  living  entities  receive  superior  and  inferior  material  bodies  that  force  them
to  suffer  the  pangs  of  repeated  birth  and  death.  The  conditioned  souls  are  unable  to
understand their actual position due to the pride that is generated from false ego. The
more one becomes attached to enjoying the fruits of his actions, the more one’s aversion
to the Lord becomes prominent.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Enumeration of the Elements of Material Creation
çré-bhagavän uväca
manaù karma-mayaà ëèëäm indriyaiù païcabhir yutam
lokäl lokaà prayäty anya ätmä tad anuvartate
Lord Kåñëa said: The mind of the conditioned soul is formed by the reactions to his
fruitive work (karma). Taking the conditioned soul  with it, the mind travels throughout
the  universe.  Although  the  soul  is  distinct  from  the  material  mind,  it  must  helplessly
follow it in conditional life.
COMMENTARY
The subtle body, consisting of mind, intelligence, and false ego, takes the conditioned
soul from one body to another, from one planet to another, according to the results of
his fruitive acts. Although the spirit soul is distinct from the material mind, it is forced
to follow it to its next destination.
PURPORT
Demanding  constant  gratification,  the  material  senses  engage  in  activities  under
the control of the conditioned mind. The mind, whose only business is accepting and
rejecting material objects for enjoyment can only act with the help of the senses. The
gross  and  subtle  bodies  are  simply  temporary  designations  of  the  eternal  spirit  soul.
The  spirit  soul  views  the  world  from  within  his  gross  and  subtle  coverings  and  as  his
mentality develops, he must transmigrate from one body to another. In conditional life,
the tendency to accept the gross and subtle bodies as the self becomes very strong.
dhyäyan mano ‘nu viñayän dåñöän vänuçrutän atha
udyat sédat karma-tantraà småtis tad anu çämyati
The  mind,  which  is  bound  by  the  reactions  of  fruitive  activities,  contemplates  the
objects  of  the  senses  that  are  found  in  this  world,  as  well  as  those  existing  in  heaven.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
526 Chapter 16
Thus, the mind appears to come into being and then become annihilated along with its
objects of perception, so that its ability to distinguish past and future is lost.
COMMENTARY
The  spirit  soul  always  accompanies  the  subtle  body.  When  the  living  entity  is
separated from the gross body, this is called death. His coming in contact with another
gross  body  is  called  birth.  In  this  verse,  the  Supreme  Lord  explains  the  cause  of  loss
of  memory.  The  mind  under  the  control  of  karma  always  meditates  on  the  objects  of
the  senses,  such  as  the  beautiful  women  of  this  world  and  the  celestial  women  of  the
heavenly planets. When the mind becomes fully merged in thought of a particular sense
object, it will force one to accept a similar form in the future. At the time of death, the
mind carries the conditioned soul into a woman’s womb to develop another body that
will experience another set of sense objects. Death causes the forgetfulness of one’s past
sensual activities but it is the same mind that develops when one comes out from the
womb.
PURPORT
By always remaining absorbed in thought of the objects of this material world, either
directly or indirectly, one loses his transcendental memory of his relationship with God.
By identifying with matter, which is always undergoing transformation, forgetfulness of
the self occurs.
viñayäbhiniveçena nätmänaà yat smaret punaù
jantor vai kasyacid dhetor måtyur atyanta-vismåtiù
When the conditioned soul quits his body to accept another body, according to his
past  karma,  he  becomes  accustomed  to  his  new  situation  and  forgets  everything  that
happened in his last life. Death means the complete forgetfulness of one’s previous life.
COMMENTARY
Due to full absorption in the present body, the mind does not remember the previous
body, which may have been that of a demigod or a demon, according to the results of
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Enumeration of the Elements of Material Creation
karma. Death means total forgetfulness of the previous gross body. When one’s reactions
of karma allotted to the present body are exhausted, death occurs.
PURPORT
Because  of  full  absorption  in  the  objects  of  the  senses,  one’s  desires  for  sense
gratification  goes  on  increasing.  Temporary  forgetfulness  of  the  objects  of  the  senses
occurs  at  the  time  of  death,  which  simply  means  that  the  conditioned  soul  is  being
transferred from one gross body to another.
janma tv ätmatayä puàsaù sarva-bhävena bhüri-da
viñaya-svékåtià prähur yathä svapna-manorathaù
O greatly charitable Uddhava, just as one may accept a dream or a fantasy as reality,
the acceptance of a new body as the self is called birth.
COMMENTARY
The  acceptance  of  a  new  body  according  to  one’s  karma  is  called  birth.  Our
identification  with  our  own  body  and  our  blind  acceptance  of  bodily  relationships  as
permanent constitute a prolonged form of dreaming or fantasy in which one imagines
oneself  to  be  separate  from  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  The  term  birth,
therefore, does not refer to the generation of a new entity but to the blind acceptance by
the spirit soul of a new material body.
PURPORT
Imagination without practical action is called a daydream. The mental concoction
that occurs in a sleeping state is called a dream. Dream and imagination are insignificant
states  of  existence,  and  they  are  similar  to  our  state  of  wakefulness  where  we  accept
perishable  objects  as  being  permanent.  The  only  real  difference  is  that  our  life  of
wakefulness lasts longer than any dream.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
528 Chapter 16
svapnaà manorathaà cetthaà präktanaà na smaraty asau
tatra pürvam ivätmänam apürvam cänupaçyati
When a person dreams at night, he forgets his waking identity. Similarly, one who
accepts the material body as the self, although eternal, forgets what kind of existence he
previously had, thinking his present life to be all-in-all.
COMMENTARY
Someone  may  claim  that  a  dreaming  person  may  sometimes  remember  a  previous
dream.  The  answer  is  that  there  are  exceptions  to  the  general  rule  that  everyone
forgets  his  previous  lives.  There  is  a  mystic  power  known  as  jäti-smara  whereby  one
can remember his previous life. Generally, however, one accepts this life as everything,
having completely forgotten his past life.
PURPORT
Just as the memory of today’s dream or daydream soon fades away, and is forgotten
when  one  has  another  dream  or  daydream  the  next  day,  because  one  is  unable  to
remember his previous life, his birth appears to him to be the start of a new existence.
indriyäyana-såñöyedaà trai-vidhyaà bhäti vastuni
bahir-antar-bhidä-hetur jano ‘saj-jana-kåd yathä
Because the mind, which is the resting place of the senses, has created an identification
with  a  new  body,  the  material  conceptions  of  high,  middle,  and  low  class  appear  as  if
pertaining to the soul. In this way, the self creates external and internal duality, just as a
man might give birth to a bad son.
PURPORT
A world of enjoyment is constructed in this life by the mind, with the help of the
senses.  As  a  result  of  bodily  identification,  temporary  considerations  of  superiority,
inferiority, and intermediate arise. A father may by nature be peaceful, but because his
bad  son  gets  into  trouble  the  father  is  forced  to  defend  his  son  and  consider  his  son’s
enemies to be enemies of the entire family. Thus the bad son implicates the father in
troublesome conflicts. Similarly, the spirit soul has no intrinsic problems, but by creating
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Enumeration of the Elements of Material Creation
a false identification with the material body the soul becomes involved in the happiness
and  distress  of  the  body.  With  this  verse  the  Lord  summarizes  His  discussion  of  the
difference between the body and the soul.
nityadä hy aìga bhütäni bhavanti na bhavanti ca
kälenälakñya-vegena sükñmatvät tan na dåçyate
My  dear  Uddhava,  by  the  influence  of  the  unseen  time,  material  bodies  are  being
created and annihilated at every moment. However, because time is so subtle, its actions
are imperceptible.
COMMENTARY
Just as time is imperceptible, the constant creation and annihilation brought about
by time is not seen by the conditioned souls due to time’s subtle nature.
yathärciñäà srotasäà ca phalänäà vä vanaspateù
tathaiva sarva-bhütänäà vayo-’vasthädayaù kåtäù
Just as, by the influence of time, the flame of a lamp, the waves of a river, and the
fruit of a tree constantly change, the age and condition of the material bodies of the living
entities also change.
COMMENTARY
Although one’s birth and death may not be seen at present, they can be understood
by hypothesis. All material transformations are caused by the influence of imperceptible
time. The examples given are the flame of a lamp, the movement of waves in a river,
and fruit, which are always seen as changing. In the same way, birth and death can be
perceived with relation to the material body, although the action of time is practically
unperceivable.  By  observing  the  changes  of  the  body,  from  childhood  to  youth  to  old
age, one can understand the subtle action of time.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
530 Chapter 16
PURPORT
Birth and death take place by the subtle influence of time. The flickering flame of a
candle sometimes waxes brightly and then again becomes weak and finally dies out. The
waves of a river are endlessly flowing. The fruit of a tree gradually appear, grow, ripen,
sweeten, and eventually rot and die. Similarly, one can easily understand that one’s own
body is undergoing constant transformation, and that the body is certainly subject to
old age, disease and death.
so ‘yaà dépo ‘rciñäà yadvat srotasäà tad idaà jalam
so ‘yaà pumän iti nåëäà måñä gér dhér måñäyuñäm
Just  as  an  ignorant  person  says,  “this  is  the  light  of  the  lamp,”  and  “this  is  the
water of the river,” even though the rays of light and water in the river are constantly
changing, one displays his false intelligence by thinking that the particular stage of the
body represents the actual person.
COMMENTARY
Someone may say, “This is the light of the lamp,” but factually, there are innumerable
rays emanating from the lamp at every moment. Similarly, one may speak of the water
of the river, but the fact is that different water passes by at every moment. In the same
way, when we think that someone is a child, that is not the fact. The body transforms
through various stages and does not indicate the actual identity of the indwelling soul.
Whether in the  body of a child or in the body of an old man, the soul is one and the
same.
PURPORT
As his body changes, a man may think that he has surpassed his previous condition.
As the flame of a lamp gradually becomes dim as the fuel is burnt, and as the waves of a
river take on different shapes, ignorant human beings accept the changing body as the
constitutional nature of the self. Actually the constitutional nature of the living entities
never  changes.  Mundane  transformations  are  temporary  in  nature.  When  the  spirit
soul’s eternal variegated pastimes are engaged in the service of the Supreme Lord, they
do not create any distaste or abomination.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Enumeration of the Elements of Material Creation
mä svasya karma-béjena jäyate so ‘py ayaà pumän
mriyate vämaro bhräntyä yathägnir däru-saàyutaù
Just  as  fire  is  produced  from  wood  and  then  is  extinguished  when  the  wood  is
completely  burnt,  the  living  entities,  who  are  eternal,  mistakenly  think  that  they  have
taken birth as a result of their past karma and then die.
COMMENTARY
When  we  burn  some  wood,  it  appears  as  if  the  fire  is  created  at  some  point  of
time  and  then  is  extinguished  when  the  fuel  is  spent.  Actually,  the  element  of  fire
continuously  exists  throughout  the  creation,  although  sometimes  it  is  manifest  to  our
eyes and sometimes not. Similarly, the living entities are eternally existing, but because
of  our  limited  vision,  it  appears  as  if    someone  is  born  and  then  later  on  dies.  This
illusory condition of life is imposed upon the living beings as a result of their fruitive
activities, but still, the living emtities themselves remain essentially unaffected.
PURPORT
As  fire  is  ignited  and  then  extinguished  by  contact  with  wood,  according  to  his
karma, a living entity is seen to undergo birth and death. Actually, the living entity is
eternal and thus never is born nor dies. As fire is present within wood and then blazes
forth and burns the wood, birth and death are manifested due to the performance of
fruitive  activities.  In  this  verse,  the  living  entities  have  been  compared  to  fire,  which
is sometimes manifest and sometimes not. There is a difference between the activities
of those who are inclined to Kåñëa’s service and those who are averse to the Lord. The
activities of the former enable one to enjoy eternal existence, whereas the activities of
the later keep one in a state of perpetual transformation.
niñeka-garbha-janmäni bälya-kaumära-yauvanam
vayo-madhyaà jarä måtyur ity avasthäs tanor nava
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
532 Chapter 16
The nine transformations—impregnation, gestation, birth, infancy, childhood, youth,
middle age, old age, and death—only relate to the material body.
COMMENTARY
The word niñeka means “to enter the womb of the mother,” the word garbha means
“to  grow  within  the  womb,”  janma  means  “to  come  out  of  the  womb,”  bälya  means
“childhood up to the age of five,” and the periods from five to sixteen years of age are
called kaumära, paugaëòa, and kaiçora.  The period from sixteen to forty-five years of
age  is  known  as  yauvana,  forty-six  to  sixty  is  called  middle-age,  and  after  that  one  is
considered to be in old age, culminating in death.
PURPORT
The nine stages of the conditioned soul are impregnation, gestation, birth, childhood,
youth, maturity, middle age, old age, and death.
etä manoratha-mayér hänyasyoccävacäs tanüù
guëa-saìgäd upädatte kvacit kaçcij jahäti ca
The living entity foolishly considers the superior and inferior positions that he has
attained as a result of activities performed in the past to be his actual self. It is very rare
that someone can give up such a false conception by the grace of the Supreme Lord.
COMMENTARY
It has already been explained that birth and death are in relation to the material
body  and  do  not  apply  to  the  spirit  soul.  Because  of  being  fully  engrossed  in  material
activities, the embodied soul foolishly identifies with his bodily condition. The result of
one’s karma in this life determines one’s future body because it shapes one’s mentality
at the time of death. Only a fortunate soul who receives the Lord’s mercy can give up
the false egoistic conceptions of “I am this body and everything in relation to the body
is mine.”
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Enumeration of the Elements of Material Creation
PURPORT
It is only by the mercy of the Supreme Lord that one can be released from the bodily
concept of life. The Lord’s mercy is causeless, and so there is always a chance of gaining
relief from materal existence.
ätmanaù pitå-puträbhyäm anumeyau bhaväpyayau
na bhaväpyaya-vastünäm abhijïo dvaya-lakñaëaù
One gains an understanding of his own birth and death by observing the death of his
father and the birth of his son. In this way, when one realistically understands the birth
and death of all material bodies, he will no longer be subject to these dualities.
COMMENTARY
One may question, “Is it a fact that the embodied living entity is the witness of all
these changes of the material body?” The answer is that by performing the funeral rites
of one’s father, and by performing the rituals related to the birth of one’s son, one can
understand the certainty of his own birth and death. The word bhava in this verse refers
to birth, growth, and so on. One who is self-realized is not bewildered by the birth and
death of the material body, knowing himself to be eternal.
PURPORT
The  eternal  spirit  soul  is  not  by  nature  subordinate  to  the  external  energy  of  the
Lord, nor under the control of time. However, those who are in the conditioned state
of  existence  have  artificially  put  themselves  in  such  a  situation.  Birth  and  death,  as
described in this verse, refers only to the material body, and not the eternal soul. A sober
person, knowing the soul to be eternal, therefore gives up false identification with the
temporary, unreliable body and takes shelter of the devotional service of the Lord. By
this process one can escape the artificial imposition of birth and death.
taror béja-vipäkäbhyäà yo vidväï janma-saàyamau
taror vilakñaëo drañöä evaà drañöä tanoù påthak
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
534 Chapter 16
One who observes the growth of a tree from a seed and later on, the death of the tree
after maturity certainly is a distinct observer who is separate from the tree. In the same
way, the witness of the birth and death of the material body is distinct from it.
COMMENTARY
Here,  the  word  vipäka  indicates  the  final  transformation  called  death.  The  rice
plant dies just at maturity, with no apparent dwindling as we see in the bodies of human
beings and animals. One should carefully consider the nature of the material body and
that of the observer, who is certainly transcendental to such changes of the body.
PURPORT
As  the  seer  of  the  seed,  tree,  and  its  fruit  is  different  from  such  transformations,
the embodied soul is the silent and neutral spectator of the birth and death of his gross
body. The liberated soul very well understands this principle whereas the conditioned
soul  falsely  identifies  with  his  body,  even  as  it  undergoes  these  transformations.  The
witness’s distinction from all visible objects is the subject matter of the liberated soul’s
realization.
prakåter evam ätmänam avivicyäbudhaù pumän
tattvena sparça-sammüòhaù saàsäraà pratipadyate
An  unintelligent  person,  who  cannot  distinguish  himself  from  material  nature,
considers the material manifestation to be real. By contact with it, he becomes completely
bewildered and enters into the cycle of repeated birth and death.
COMMENTARY
It  may  be  questioned,  “How  does  a  foolish  person  fall  into  material  existence?”
Because a foolish person identifies himself with matter, he naturally becomes attached
to his body and the objects of the senses.
PURPORT
The conditioned souls, who are fully absorbed in matter, take pleasure in associating
with  the  objects  produced  by  material  nature  and  thus  enter  deeper  into  material
existence.  Forgetfulness  of  the  self  makes  him  think  that  he  is  something  that  he
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Enumeration of the Elements of Material Creation
actually is not. In this regard, one should carefully consider this verse from the Çrémad-
Bhägavatam (1.7.5):
yayä sammohito jéva ätmänaà tri-guëätmakam
paro ’pi manute ’narthaà tat-kåtaà cäbhipadyate
Due to this external energy, the living entity, although transcendental to the
three modes of material nature, thinks of himself as a material product and thus
undergoes the reactions of material miseries.
sattva-saìgäd åñén devän rajasäsura-mänuñän
tamasä bhüta-tiryaktvaà bhrämito yäti karmabhiù
The living entities who traverse the path of material existence, being driven by the
results  of  their  karma,  take  birth  as  sages  or  demigods  when  the  mode  of  goodness  is
prominent. When the mode of passion is prominent, they take birth as demons or human
beings, and when the mode of ignorance is prominent, they take birth as ghosts or in the
lower species.
PURPORT
By the influence of the three modes of material nature, the forgetful living entities
consider themselves as enjoyers and doers and thus receive various types of bodies, such
as those of demigods, sages, demons, human beings, beasts, birds, and so on.
nåtyato gäyataù paçyan yathaivänukaroti tän
evaà buddhi-guëän paçyann aného ‘py anukäryate
Just as a spectator sometimes imitates a singer or dancer, the spirit soul, although not
actually the doer but merely a witness, becomes captivated by material intelligence and
thus imitates its activities.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
536 Chapter 16
COMMENTARY
One  may  be  attracted  to  a  professional  singer  or  dancer  and  then  sing  the  songs
heard and imitate the dances seen, entering into the mood of the performer. In the same
way, the conditioned soul imitates the dictations of the mind in an attempt to become
an enjoyer of the material world. Such an attempt is doomed to frustration, however the
conditioned  soul  is  similarly  captivated  by  the  concoctions  of  the  material  mind  and
intelligence, which convince him that he can become the enjoyer of the material world.
Such an attempt is doomed to frustration, however, because the soul is never the doer
of activities, which are simply carried out by material nature, entailing repeated birth
and death.
PURPORT
As a foolish boy may imitate a singer or dancer but fail to do a good job, the witnessing
spirit soul engages his body and mind in imitating the activities of enjoyment within the
material world, but fails to achieve satisfaction.
yathämbhasä pracalatä taravo ‘pi calä iva
cakñusä bhrämyamäëena dåçyate bhramatéva bhüù
yathä manoratha-dhiyo viñayñänubhavo måñä
svapna-dåñöäç ca däçärha tathä saàsära ätmanaù
The reflection of a tree on the water appears to quiver. When one spins around and
around, the earth also appears to be spinning. While dreaming, the world that one sees
appears to be real, although it is a concoction. In the same way, the soul’s material life, his
experience of sense gratification, is actually false, O descendant of Daçärha.
COMMENTARY
When  one  rides  in  a  boat  on  a  river,  the  trees  on  the  bank  of  the  river  that  are
reflected  in  the  water  also  appear  to  be  moving.  In  the  same  way,  the  bewildered
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Enumeration of the Elements of Material Creation
conditioned  souls  consider  themselves  to  be  the  doers  of  activities  which  are  in  fact
merely interactions of the external body with the modes of nature.
PURPORT
Trees appear to be swaying when reflected in agitated water, and when one is sitting
on a moving boat, the trees on the shore appear to be moving. Similarly, when the living
entities become attracted to the external energy of the Lord, thus deviating from their
constitutional position, they become bewildered and think themselves to be the doers
and enjoyers.
arthe hy avidyamäne ‘pi saàsåtir na nivartate
dhyäyato viñayän asya svapne ‘narthägamo yathä
Just as one may experience being bitten by a snake in a dream and thus suffer, although
there is no actual snake, the conditioned souls remain entangled in material existence due
to absorption in sense gratification, although the objects of the senses are not real.
COMMENTARY
Although material bondage is false, the distress caused by material existence cannot
easily be overcome. The Lord therefore explains here that although not factual, material
life  stubbornly  continues  for  one  addicted  to  sense  gratification,  just  as  a  frightening
dream continues for one who is sleeping. One who remains fully engrossed in thought of
material enjoyment certainly becomes subjected to material miseries due to his contact
with matter.
PURPORT
The experience of a dream has no value to the seer when he wakes up. In the same
way,  a  liberated  soul  can  understand  that  illusory  material  enjoyment  and  temporary
material  designation  are  not  eternal.  As  a  dreamer  sees  things  that  actually  have  no
existence, the conditioned soul sees material objects as being separate from the Supreme
Lord.  All  the  transformable  objects  created  by  the  external  energy  of  the  Lord  are
destroyed in due course of time. The spirit soul, being deprived of engagement in the
devotional service of the Lord, who is the object of knowledge, as well as the opportunity
to  experience  uninterrupted  happiness,  remains  situated  in  an  incompatible  position
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
538 Chapter 16
while  experiencing  fragmented  time,  imperfect  knowledge,  and  obstructed  happiness.
After one awakens from a dream, the remembrance of the dream may linger. Similarly,
one engaging in the devotional service of the Lord may be sometimes troubled by the
dim reflection of his previous sinful life. One should therefore become strong in Kåñëa
consciousness by hearing the Lord’s instructions to Çré Uddhava.
tasmäd uddhava mä bhuìkñva viñayän asad-indriyaiù
ätmägrahaëa-nirbhätaà paçya vaikalpikaà bhramam
Therefore, O Uddhava, do not indulge in sense gratification with your blunt material
senses. Instead, understand how the illusion based on the dualities of material existence
prevent one from realizing the self.
COMMENTARY
Meditation on the objects of the senses with a spirit of enjoyment is the cause of all
anarthas. Therefore, one should give up such meditation, realizing that it is only due to
ignorance that one accepts the body as the self. Attachment to the material body, which
is not the self, is the cause of illusion. This is the purport of this verse.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord instructs Uddhava that an intelligent person should realize the
uselessness of trying to gratify the senses unnecessarily, seeing things as being without
a relation to Lord Kåñëa. If, by seeing the pathetic condition of the conditioned souls,
one becomes determined to realize his constitutional position, he should be considered
a genuine philosopher.
kñipto ‘vamänito ‘sadbhiù pralabdho ‘süyito ‘tha vä
täòitaù sanniruddho vä våttyä vä parihäpitaù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Enumeration of the Elements of Material Creation
niñöhyuto mütrito väjïair bahudhaivaà prakampitaù
çreyas-kämaù kåcchra-gata ätmanätmänam uddharet
A devotee who actually desires to attain perfection in this very life should tolerate
all  kinds  of  difficulties.  Even  when  insulted,  ridiculed,  or  even  beaten  or  confined  by
miscreants, or when spat upon or urinated upon by ignorant fools, with intelligence fixed
in devotional service, he should remain undisturbed.
COMMENTARY
How can one live without indulging in sense gratification? These two verses provide
the  answer.  If  one  is  driven  out,  taunted,  insulted,  deprived  of  his  livelihood,  or  spat
upon, he should simply tolerate these inconveniences and protect himself with his good
intelligence by remaining fixed in self-realization.
PURPORT
If one realizes the misery suffered in the field of material activities and thus become
busy  in  trying  to  find  a  solution,  either  by  increasing  his  material  enjoyment  or  by
renunciation of sense gratification, he will not be able to attain the ultimate goal of life.
In this regard, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu instructs us:
“One  can  chant  the  holy  name  of  the  Lord  in  a  humble  state  of  mind,  thinking
himself lower than the straw in the street. One should be more tolerant than the tree,
devoid of all sense of false prestige, and ready to offer all respects to others. ln such a
state of mind, one can chant the holy name of the Lord constantly.”
If one seriously follows this advice, then the temptation for increasing material enjoyment
and the simple renunciation of the fruits of karma will not capture one. The best means for
achieving auspiciousness is to become sober, tolerant, and free from false ego.
´Î3{H 3HÌ=
çré-uddhava uväca
yathaivam anubudhyeyaà vada no vadatäà vara
Çré Uddhava said: O most eloquent speaker, kindly explain these statements so that I
may properly understand them.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 16
uddhava-gétä
COMMENTARY
Uddhava said: Please tell me how I can tolerate the above-mentioned disturbances
and thus become advanced in spiritual life.
su-duùñaham imaà manya ätmany asad-atikramam
viduñäm api viçvätman prakåtir hi baléyasé
åte tvad-dharma-niratän çäntäàs te caraëälayän
O soul of the universe, one’s acquired nature in material life is very strong. Because
of this, it is very difficult for even learned men to tolerate the offenses committed against
them by ignorant people. I think that only Your devotees, who are fixed in Your loving
service, are able to tolerate such offenses.
COMMENTARY
Even learned people who know that they should tolerate abuse are unable to do so
because  theoretical  learning  alone  cannot  make  one  saintly.  On  the  other  hand,  the
devotees,  because  they  possess  a  similar  nature  to  that  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  remain
peaceful in all conditions of life because they always reside under the shade of the Lord’s
lotus feet.
PURPORT
As  long  as  one  has  a  propensity  for  material  enjoyment  and  thus  is  absorbed  in
matter,  he  cannot  attain  peace.  By  taking  shelter  of  a  so-called  spiritual  master  who
desires  material  enjoyment,  liberation,  or  mystic  perfections,  one’s  restlessness  in  the
form of material desires will not decrease. Only by the good influence of the devotees’
association,  and  following  their  instructions,  can  one  make  tangible  advancement  in
spiritual life.
Thus  end  the  translation  of  the  sixteenth  chapter  of  the  Uddhava-géta  entitled
“Enumeration  of  the  Elements  of  Material  Creation”  with  the  commentaries  of
Çréla  Viçvanätha  Cakravarté  Öhäkura  and  chapter  summary  and  purports  by  Çréla
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 17
the song of the avanté brähmaëa
CHAPTER SUMMARY
This chapter tells the story of a wandering mendicant sannyäsé from the country
of Avanté as an example of how one should tolerate the disturbances created by foolish
people.
The harsh words of uncultured persons pierce the heart even more painfully than
arrows.  Still,  the  mendicant  brähmaëa  from  the  city  of  Avanté,  even  while  being
attacked by wicked men, considered this misery to be the result of his own past misdeeds
and  so  he  tolerated  it  without  being  disturbed.  Previously,  the  brähmaëa  had  been  a
farmer and merchant. He had been extremely greedy, miserly, and prone to anger, and
so his wife, sons, daughters, relatives, and servants were deprived of a life of enjoyment
and  gradually  came  to  neglect  him.  In  due  course  of  time,  thieves,  family  members,
and  providence  took  away  all  of  his  wealth.  Finding  himself  without  any  money  and
abandoned by everyone, the brähmaëa developed a deep sense of detachment.
He considered how the earning and preservation of wealth involve great effort, fear,
anxiety, and confusion. Because of wealth, there arise fifteen unwanted things-thievery,
violence, lying, deception, lust, anger, pride, feverishness, disagreement, hatred, distrust,
conflict, attachment to women, gambling, and intoxication. When this meditation arose
within his heart, the brähmaëa could understand that the Supreme Lord Çré Hari had
somehow become satisfied with him. He felt that it was because the Lord had become
pleased with him that the apparently unfavorable turn of events in his life had occurred.
He was grateful that a sense of detachment had arisen in his heart and he considered
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
542 Chapter 17
It to be the factual means for his deliverance. In this condition, he became determined
to engage in the worship of Lord Hari for the rest of his life and for this purpose, he
accepted  the  order  of  tridaëòi-sannyäsa.  Thereafter,  he  entered  different  villages  to
beg alms, but the people disturbed him in various ways. Still, he simply tolerated this,
remaining firm like a mountain. He remained fixed in his spiritual practice and sang a
song that has become famous as the Bhikñu-géta.
Neither human beings, demigods, the soul, planets, the reactions of work, nor time
are  the  causes  of  one’s  happiness  and  distress.  Rather,  the  mind  alone  is  their  cause,
because it is the mind that causes the spirit soul to wander in the cycle of material life.
The real purpose of all kinds of pious activities, such as charity, and the performance of
religious rituals, is to bring the mind under control. One who has already conquered his
mind by meditation has no need for any other process, and for one who is incapable of
fixing his mind, all processes are of no practical use. The false conception of the material
ego binds the eternal spirit soul to material sense objects. The Avanté brähmaëa became
determined to cross over the insurmountable ocean of material existence by rendering
service to the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, Mukunda, with the same faith in the Lord
that was exhibited by great devotees in the past.
Only when one can focus his intelligence on the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead can the mind be completely controlled. This is the essence of all practices
meant for spiritual advancement.
çré-bädaräyaëir uväca
sa evam äçaàsita uddhavena bhägavata-mukhyena däçärha-mukhyaù
sabhäjayan bhåtya-vaco mukundas tam äbabhäñe çravaëéya-véryaù
Çukadeva  Gosvämé  said:  Lord  Mukunda,  the  foremost  of  Däçärhas,  at  the  request
of the exalted devotee, Uddhava, first praised His servant’s fine statements. The Lord,
whose pastimes are meditated upon by great sages, then replied.
COMMENTARY
This chapter describes how a dishonest person lost his wealth and then was insulted
by miscreants, and how one can remove his distress with the help of his intelligence.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Song of the AvantéBrähmaëa
çré-bhagavän uväca
bärhaspatya sa nästy atra sädhur vai durjaneritaiù
duraktair bhinnam ätmänaà yaù samädhätum éçvaraù
The  Supreme  Lord  said:  O  disciple  of  Båhaspati,  rare  is  the  saintly  person  in  this
world who is capable of pacifying his mind after it has been agitated by the harsh words
of a miscreant.
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Lord said: O disciple of Båhaspati, my dear Uddhava, your statements
are most reasonable. There is a completely spiritual path that is incomprehensible even
to your spiritual master, Båhaspati. Now, hear of this from Me.
PURPORT
Devotees try to follow in the footsteps of saintly persons, and yet non-devotees often
attack them by putting forth unreasonable arguments. Upon seeing the non-devotees’
life of eat, drink, and make merry, the simple-minded and peaceful devotees feel broken-
hearted.  Although  the  devotees  remain  aloof  from  sinful  persons,  the  non-devotees’
abominable mentality and their harsh words by which they insult others certainly curb
the progress of the human society.
na tathä tapyate viddhaù pumän bäëais tu marma-gaiù
yathä tudanti marma-sthä hy asatäà paruñeñavaù
The harsh and insulting words hurled by the lowest among men cause more pain than
the sharp arrows that penetrate one’s chest during a battle.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
544 Chapter 17
COMMENTARY
Harsh words are here compared to sharp arrows.
kathayanti mahat puëyam itihäsam ihoddhava
tam ahaà varëayiñyämi nibodha su-samähitaù
My dear Uddhava, please listen attentively as I narrate a most pious history that the
compilers of the Puräëas have narrated in this regard.
kenacid bhikñuëä gétaà paribhütena durjanaiù
smaratä dhåti-yuktena vipäkaà nija-karmaëäm
Once there was a sannyäséwho was insulted in many ways by sinful men. However,
with  determination,  he  remembered  that  he  was  suffering  the  results  of  his  previous
actions. I shall now narrate to you his story, and that which he spoke.
COMMENTARY
Although it is common to hear harsh words these days, they are nonetheless more
painful than sharp arrows. The Lord is herein narrating a story from the Puräëas. The
word vipäka means “fruits.”
PURPORT
Those who try to live a renounced and saintly life are generally insulted by uncivilized
men. Still, a saintly person knows that he is not simply being offended by coarse fools.
He  knows  that  whatever  happiness  and  distress  he  experiences  in  this  world  are  the
results  of  his  previous  activities.  Therefore,  it  is  always  advised  that  those  who  desire
liberation  from  material  existence,  regardless  of  the  path  they  cultivate,  should  never
become angry and retaliate those who offend or insult them. In this regard, Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu  has instructed  us  to  be  as toleranat as  a  tree.  This instruction  is  for the
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Song of the AvantéBrähmaëa
benefit of all kinds of people because practically, in any endeavor, it is experienced that
only by tolerance is conflict avoided. If one does not respond to those who offend him,
one will find that such ruffians will soon leave him alone.
avantiñu dvijaù kaçcid äséd äòhyatamaù çriyä
värtä-våttiù kadaryas tu kämé lubdho ‘ti-kopanaù
Long ago, in the country of Avanti, there lived a brähmaëa who was wealthy and
endowed  with  great  opulence.  He  engaged  in  farming  and  commerce,  but  he  was  very
miserly, lusty, greedy, and prone to anger.
COMMENTARY
The  city  of  Avanté  is  in  the  district  of  Malwa.  This  brähmaëa  was  a  farmer  and
businessman by profession, but his character was abominable. One who gives abuses to
his  wife  and  children,  disregards  all  religious  principles,  disrespects  the  demigods  and
guests, and torments servants is certainly an abominable person.
jïätayo ‘tithayas tasya väì-mätreëäpi närcitäù
çünyävasatha ätmäpi käle kämair anarcitaù
In his home, which was devoid of religiosity and reasonable comfort, no one was given
respect, be they family members or guests. Not only was the brähmaëa miserly toward
others, he did not even grant his own body sufficient gratification.
COMMENTARY
The  brähmaëa’s  householder  life  was  completely  devoid  of  any  religious
observances.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
546 Chapter 17
duùçélasya kadaryasya druhyante putra-bändhaväù
därä duhitaro bhåtyä viñaëëä näcaran priyam
Because he was so callous and stingy, his wife, children, and other relatives, and even
his servants came to hate him. Being thoroughly disgusted with him, they did not even
bother to feign affection.
COMMENTARY
Neighbors always hate a wicked person.
tasyaivaà yakña-vittasya cyutasyobhaya-lokataù
dharma-käma-vihénasya cukrudhuù païca-bhäginaù
The five presiding deities of the five family sacrifices became angry with the brähmaëa
who, being very frugal, protected his wealth like a Yakña, who was certainly cultivating
inauspiciousness for both this life and the next, and who was totally devoid of religiosity
and sense enjoyment.
COMMENTARY
The Yakñas only business is to accumulate and protect wealth. They do not utilize
it,  either  for  themselves  of  for  others.  The  five  types  of  living  entities  who  deserve  a
share  of  sacrificial  offerings  are  the  demigods,  sages,  forefathers,  human  beings,  and
lower classes of beings. When they are deprived of their share, they become angry at a
householder.
PURPORT
If the demigods, sages, forefathers, human beings, and other living entities do not
receive  their  respective  shares  of  sacrificial  performances,  they  become  angry  at  a
materialistic fruitive worker.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Song of the AvantéBrähmaëa
tad-avadhyäna-visrasta-puëya-skandhasya bhüri-da
artho ‘py agacchan nidhanaà bahv-äyäsa-pariçramaù
O magnanimous Uddhava, as a result of disregarding the demigods in this way, the
brähmaëa gradually lost his accumulated piety and soon became bereft of his hard-earned
wealth.
COMMENTARY
The  brähmaëa  lost  everything,  including  his  hard-earned  wealth,  because  of
neglecting those upon whom he depended. Accumulating wealth by means of farming
and trading is certainly very laborious.
ïätyo jagåhuù kiïcit kiïcid dasyava uddhava
daivataù kälataù kiïcid brahma-bandhor nå-pärthivät
O  Uddhava,  some  of  the  wealth  of  that  fallen  brähmaëa  was  taken  away  by  his
relatives, some by thieves, some by providence, some by the influence of time, some by
ordinary men, and some by the king.
COMMENTARY
The  brähmaëa  lost his  wealth  as a result of natural  calamities,  such as fire  in his
house, as well as due to food grains rotting under the influence of time, theft, government
taxes, and pilfering by his friends and relatives. In this way, he became a poor man.
PURPORT
If a brähmaëa neglects his brahminical duties, he is referred to as brahma-bandhu,
or  a  so-called  brähmaëa,  and  not  considered  a  genuine  brähmaëa.  One  who  takes
pride  in  posing  as  a  brähmaëa  without  making  any  attempt  to  elevate  himself  to  the
transcendental platform is not a genuine brähmaëa, but is referred to as brahma-bandhu,
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
548 Chapter 17
or the friend of a brähmaëa. Devotees of the Lord are not proud, thinking themselves
to be the most exalted members of society. Rather, they very humbly think themselves
fallen and without any qualifications. However, those who are intelligent know that such
humble devotees are actually brähmaëas whose hearts are cleansed by their engagement
in the devotional service of the Lord.
sa evaà draviëe nañöe dharma-käma-vivarjitaù
upekñitaç ca sva-janaiç cintäm äpa duratyayäm
At last, when all his wealth was lost, the brahmaëa, who never engaged in religious
practices or sense enjoyment, was totally ignored by his family. Because of this, he began
to feel terrible anxiety.
tasyaivaà dhyäyato dérghaà nañöa-räyas tapasvinaù
khidyato bäñpa-kaëöhasya nirvedaù su-mahän abhüt
Being deprived of his wealth, the brähmaëa felt great fear and lamentation. Thereafter,
while  meditating  upon  his  misfortune  at  great  length,  a  strong  feeling  of  detachment
developed within him.
COMMENTARY
The miserly brähmaëa had to suffer the consequences of his own faults. Finally, due
to his previous training in piety, he experienced a change of heart. When he lost all his
wealth, the brähmaëa had no alternative but to live like an ascetic.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Song of the AvantéBrähmaëa
sa cähedam aho kañöaà våthätmä me ‘nutäpitaù
na dharmäya na kämäya yasyärthäyäsa édåçaù
The brähmaëa spoke as follows: O what great misfortune! I simply tormented myself
uselessly, working so hard to earn money that was not utilized for religiosity or material
enjoyment.
PURPORT
When one suffers a great setback on the path of his material life, one may understand
that  by  failing  to  utilize  everything  in  the  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord  and  instead
engaging  in  activities  having  no  relationship  with  Kåñëa  consciousness,  one  gains
nothing.
präyeëäthäù kadaryäëäà na sukhäya kadäcana
iha cätmopatäpäya måtasya narakäya ca
Generally,  the  wealth  of  misers  never  affords  them  any  happiness.  In  this  life,  it
simply torments them with anxiety, and when they die, it buys their ticket to hell.
COMMENTARY
Being  afraid  to  spend  any  money,  misers  avoid  performing  constitutional  and
conventional duties.
PURPORT
Conditioned  souls  who  have  forgotten  their  constitutional  position  accept  many
things in this world to be their ultimate goal of life. However, these things become the
cause of their degradation, making them suffer in hell in their next life.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
550 Chapter 17
yaço yaçasvinäà çuddhaà çläghyä ye guëinäà guëäù
lobhaù sv-alpo ‘pi tän hanti çvitro rüpam ivepsitam
Just as even a trace of white leprosy spoils one’s physical beauty, even a tinge of greed
destroys a person’s good reputation and sullies whatever praiseworthy qualities are found
in a virtuous soul.
COMMENTARY
White leprosy certainly spoils a person’s beauty.
arthasya sädhane siddhe utkarñe rakñaëe vyaye
Näçopabhoga äyäsas träsaç cintä bhramo nåëäm
People who work very hard to earn and accumulate wealth are afraid of spending it,
are in anxiety about protecting it, and become bewildered when it is lost.
COMMENTARY
There are various kinds of distress experienced by one who endeavors to accumulate
wealth. Such misery is experienced at all stages—while earning it, while protecting it,
while spending it, and when it is somehow lost. There are fifteen types of anartha born
of wealth, such as gambling, drinking wine, and so on.
PURPORT
Because  the  means  for  acquiring  wealth,  as  well  as  its  attainment,  enhancement,
protection, and expenditure are under the influence of time, these are always accompanied
by anxiety, hard labor, and bewilderment.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Song of the AvantéBrähmaëa
steyaà hiàsänåtaà dambhaù kämaù krodhaù smayo madaù
bhedo vairam aviçväsaù saàspardhä vyasanäni ca
ete païcadaçänarthä hy artha-mülä matä nåëäm
tasmäd anartham arthäkhyaà çreyo-’rthé düratas tyajet
Fifteen  undesirable  qualities  arise  because  of  wealth—theft,  violence,  falsehood,
duplicity, lust, anger, quarrel, madness, competition, enmity, faithlessness, arrogance, and
the  dangers  arising  from  attachment  to  women,  gambling,  and  intoxication.  Therefore,
those who desire their own benefit should give up attachment to excessive wealth, which
is the mother of all anarthas.
COMMENTARY
It  takes  great  endeavor  to  accumulate  wealth.  Then,  one  is  always  afraid  that  his
wealth  will  be  stolen  or  taken  away  by  some  other  means.  To  protect  his  wealth,  one
must  lie,  and  excessive  wealth  certainly  is  the  cause  of  great  pride  and  delusion.  In
this  way,  there  are  fifteen  kinds  of  anartha  that  surface  because  of  wealth.  It  can  be
concluded that artha (wealth) is the cause of all anarthas (unwanted things).
PURPORT
One who desires his actual benefit should reject as useless that which is ascertained
as  beneficial  according  to  worldly  calculation.  In  this  connection,  there  are  fifteen
unwanted  things  that  are  created  by  excessive  wealth.  The  main  intention  of  those
who accumulate great wealth is sense gratification. The unwanted things that are born
from excessive wealth are theft, violence, lying, pride, lust, anger, false pride, madness,
duplicity,  enmity,  faithlessness,  arrogance,  and  addiction  to  women,  gambling,  and
intoxication. In general, gold and silver coins that are exchanged for the objects of sense
gratification are known as artha, or wealth.
bhidyante bhrätaro däräù pitaraù suhådas tathä
ekäsnigdhäù käkiëinä sadyaù sarve ‘rayaù kåtäù
Even a man’s brothers, wife, parents, and friends, who appear bound to him in love
can immediately break off their affectionate relationships and become enemies due to a
dispute over even an insignificant sum of money.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
552 Chapter 17
COMMENTARY
Even though one’s brothers, father, wife, and friends may appear to be on good terms
with him, they can quickly turn into enemies for the sake of a single penny.
PURPORT
The  word  käkiëi  means  “twenty  barätikä,”  which  is  the  coin  of  the  smallest
denomination, or value.
arthenälpéyasä hy ete saàrabdhä dépta-manyavaù
tyajanty äçu spådho ghnanti sahasotsåjya sauhådam
For the sake of even an insignificant amount of money, these dear ones may become
agitated and angry. Within a moment they may give up their affection and sever all ties,
even up to the point of murder.
COMMENTARY
The word spådhaù means “audacity, or arrogance.”
labdhvä janmämara-prärthyaà mänuñyaà tad dvijägryatäm
tad anädåtya ye svärthaà ghnanti yänty açubhäà gatim
Those who obtain this rare human form of life, which is desired even by the demigods,
and take birth as brähmaëas, are extremely fortunate. If they misuse this opportunity
and fail to attain their real self-interest, they come to a most unfortunate end.
PURPORT
Human life is superior to that of a demigod, ghost, animal, tree, or an inanimate stone
because the demigods are absorbed in celestial pleasure while neglecting their real self-
interest, and in other forms of life there is predominantly suffering. Human life affords
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Song of the AvantéBrähmaëa
one the opportunity of attaining the ultimate goal of life. In the human form, one has
the opportunity of surpassing the concocted ideas born of a background of anyäbhiläña,
karma and jïäna, and engaging in the devotional service of the Supreme Lord. In the
life of a çudra, which is generally devoid of piety, there is no possibility of contemplating
one’s  real  self-interest  because  a  çudra  is  very  busy  serving  the  other  three  varëas,  as
well  as  his  desires  for  sense  enjoyment.  Knowledge  of  Brahman  and  Paramätmä,  and
the right for serving the Supreme Personality of Godhead, are the domain of the best of
the twice-born. However, such a high birth has no value if one is bereft of Lord Hari’s
service. There is no value in simply becoming a so-called brahmana. In this regard one
should carefully consider this verse from the Srimad-Bhägavatam (11.5.3):
ya eñäà puruñaà säkñäd ätma-prabhavam éçvaram
na bhajanty avajänanti sthänäd bhrañöäù patanty adhaù
Anyone who does not render service and neglects his duty unto the primeval
Lord,  who  is  the  source  of  all  living  entities,  will  certainly  fall  down  from  his
constitutional position.
The desire to become master of all one surveys checks one’s advancement in spiritual
life. When a brähmaëa gives up the devotional service of the Lord and works hard like
a çüdra, simply for the prestige of his community, then lording it over material nature
and the desire to enjoy the fruits of karma become very prominent A brähmaëa, free
from false prestige, should feel himself lower than a blade of grass and offer respect to
all living entities. All human beings, and especially brähmaëas, should avoid becoming
killers of their own self-interest by neglecting Kåñëa consciousness, the loving service of
the Lord. Such neglect paves the way for future suffering.
svargäpavargayor dväraà präpya lokam imaà pumän
draviëe ko ‘nuñajjeta martyo ‘narthasya dhämani
After receiving this human form of life, which is the gateway to heaven and liberation,
who would become attached to the accumulation of wealth, which brings with it all kinds
of anarthas?
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
554 Chapter 17
PURPORT
Objects intended for one’s personal enjoyment are referred to as draviëa, or material
wealth.  Those  who  desire  to  achieve  wealth,  who  endeavor  to  transfer  themselves  to
the heavenly planets, who practice renunciation with a desire to attain liberation, and
who  endeavor  to  attain  the  four  objectives  of  human  life,  are  unable  to  achieve  their
real  self-interest  because  all  of  these  desire  are  impediment  to  the  attainment  of  the
Lord’s devotional service. Both material enjoyment and liberation are just like a mirage
for  those  who  have  received  the  mercy  of  the  Lord.  Because  material  enjoyment  and
liberation are not conceived of as being in relation to Kåñëa, they are considered to be
anarthas.
devarñi-pitå-bhütäni jïätén bandhüàç ca bhäginaù
asaàvibhajya cätmänaà yakña-vittaù pataty adhaù
One who does not give his hard-earned wealth to those to whom he is obligated, such
as the demigods, forefathers, great sages, family members, and living beings in general, is
no better than a Yakña and will certainly fall down from his position.
COMMENTARY
Because  the  demigods,  sages,  forefathers,  living  entities  in  general,  relatives,  and
friends are all inter-related, they are shareholders of one’s wealth. When one deprives
them of their shares and tries to enjoy alone, they will naturally become envious and
thus withhold their mercy. This will create an impediment on the path of one’s plans to
enjoy sense gratification.
vyarthayärthehayä vittaà pramattasya vayo balam
kuçalä yena sidhyanti jaraöhaù kià nu sädhaye
Those who are actually intelligent are able to utilize their money, youth, and strength
to  achieve  perfection.  Unfortunately,  I  have  feverishly  squandered  these  assets  in  the
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Song of the AvantéBrähmaëa
useless endeavor for accumulating wealth. Now that I have become an old man, it is too
late for me to do anything auspicious.
COMMENTARY
“The very wealth for which I had become intoxicated is now gone. Intelligent people
utilize their wealth in the service of the Supreme Lord and thus attain perfection. I am
now an old man and so how will I be able to recover my losses?” This is the brahmana’s
lamentation.
PURPORT
The  brahmana  thought,  “How  will  I  accumulate  the  wealth  that  is  required  for
acquiring the objects for sense gratification in my old age?”
kasmät saìkliçyate vidvän vyarthayärthehayäsakåt
kasyacin mäyayä nünaà loko ‘yaà su-vimohitaù
Why should an intelligent person suffer because of his useless efforts to accumulate
wealth? Indeed, everyone appears to be bewildered by someone’s illusory potency.
COMMENTARY
The brähmaëa thought that his misfortune must have been caused by the influence
of the Lord’s illusory energy, Maya. By her influence, the whole world is bewildered.
PURPORT
Due  to  lack  of  knowledge  of  the  Absolute  Truth,  the  conditioned  souls  are
overwhelmed  by  the  Lord’s  illusory  energy,  accepting  the  manifestations  of  the  Lord’s
energies  as  meant  for  their  own  enjoyment.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  conditioned
souls remain in illusion and thus continue to suffer.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
556 Chapter 17
kià dhanair dhana-dair vä kià kämair vä käma-dair uta
måtyunä grasyamänasya karmabhir vota janma-daiù
For one who is about to die, what is the use of wealth, sense gratification, or any such
thing, and what is the use of other persons who may offer them, which simply cause one
to repeatedly take birth in this world?
PURPORT
Wealth,  the  giver  of  wealth,  sense  gratification,  and  the  objects  of  the  senses
continuously  transform  by  the  influence  of  time.  What  then  is  use  of  being  proud,
thinking oneself to be the doer that awards himself the fruits of his actions?
nünaà me bhagaväàs tuñöaù sarva-deva-mayo hariù
yena néto daçäm etäà nirvedaç cätmanaù plavaù
Çré Hari, who is the Lord of the demigods, must have been pleased with me. It is by
His mercy that I have attained this present state of suffering, and have thus developed
a sense of detachment, which is the boat that will carry me across the ocean of material
existence.
COMMENTARY
When the brähmaëa realized that his suffering condition enabled him to become
detached,  he  became  joyful,  understanding  that  his  so-called  misfortune  was  actually
the Lord’s special mercy. Such detachment from materialistic life is a sure symptom of
the Lord’s causeless mercy and the brähmaëa considered it to be the boat for crossing
over the ocean of material existence.
PURPORT
The  brähmaëa  thought, “The demigods are  empowered to award their worshipers
varieties  of  worldly  and  heavenly  sense  pleasures.  Therefore,  they  are  only  givers  of
imperfect benedictions. Now that all my assets have been snatched away, I think that
the almighty Lord, who is my real benefactor, has mercifully given me relief from the
struggle for existence that characterizes life in the material world. Now I have become
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Song of the AvantéBrähmaëa
detached from the four objectives of life such—religiosity, economic development, sense
gratification, and liberation, which are sought after by less-intelligent people.”
so ‘haà kälävaçeñeëa çoñayiñye ‘ìgam ätmanaù
Apramatto ‘khila-svärthe yadi syät siddha ätmani
If I have some more time to live, then I will perform austerities while subsisting upon
the bare minimum of food. Without further bewilderment, I will execute that which is
actually in my self-interest, and thus remain self-satisfied.
COMMENTARY
The  brähmaëa  was  eager  to  finish  his  life  of  material  enjoyment  at  any  cost.  He
thought that if he could spend the rest of his life thinking of the Lord’s lotus feet, which
are the root cause of all self-interest, then his perfection would be guaranteed.
PURPORT
The  Avanté  brähmaëa  considered  that  it  is  useless  to  aspire  for  advancement  of
religiosity,  economic  development,  and  sense  gratification,  and  also  futile  to  try  and
rid one of all desires for material enjoyment by performing austerities. He thought, “To
become freed from the materialistic mentality of achieving the perfection of religiosity,
economic  development,  sense  gratification,  and  liberation,  I  must  take  shelter  of
devotional service to the Lord.”
tatra mäm anumoderan deväs tri-bhuvaneçvaräù
muhürtena brahma-lokaà khaöväìgaù samasädhayat
May  the  demigods,  who  are  the  presiding  deities  of  the  three  worlds,  bestow  their
mercy upon me. After all, Mahäräja Khaöväìga was able to attain Vaikuëöha in just a
moment.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
558 Chapter 17
COMMENTARY
The Avanté brähmaëa considered that if the demigods, headed by Indra, approved
of his intention, then they will no longer create obstacles for him. Being near the end
of his life, he carefully considered what he could do for his ultimate welfare and while
doing  so,  he  thought  of  King  Khaöväìga,  who  went  back  to  Godhead  simply  after  a
moment’s engagement in Kåñëa consciousness.
PURPORT
King Khaöväìga, who had fought on behalf of the demigods, attained the ultimate goal
of life within a moment by renouncing all desires for religiosity, economic development,
sense gratification, and liberation. The mendicant brähmaëa from Avanté prayed to the
demigods  who  manage  the  universal  affairs  for  the  benediction  of  engagement  in  the
devotional service of Lord Kåñëa.
çré-bhagavän uväca
ity abhipretya manasä hy ävantyo dvija-sattamaù
unmucya hådaya-granthén çänto bhikñur abhün muniù
Lord Çré Kåñëa continued: Having made up his mind in this way, the exalted Avanté
brähmaëa cut asunder the knots of material attachment within his heart. In this way, he
became a self-satisfied mendicant in the renounced order of life.
COMMENTARY
The phrase hådaya granthén means “the knots in the heart.” The brähmaëa was able
to untie these knots in the heart, which are in the form of the misconception, “I am this
body and everything in relation to this body is mine.”
PURPORT
The most fortunate brähmaëa from Avanté became a tridandi sannyäsé devotee of
the Supreme Lord by cutting the knots of desire for material enjoyment and liberation
that had existed within his heart. At that time, the following verses began to appear in
his heart:
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Song of the AvantéBrähmaëa
jäta-çraddho mat-kathäsu nirviëëaù sarva-karmasu
veda duùkhätmakän kämän parityäge ’py anéçvaraù
tato bhajeta mäà prétaù çraddhälur dåòha-niçcayaù
juñamäëaç ca tän kämän duùkhodarkäàç ca garhayan
proktena bhakti-yogena bhajato mäsakån muneù
kämä hådayyä naçyanti sarve mayi hådi sthite
bhidyate hådaya-granthiç chidyante sarva-saàçayäù
kñéyante cäsya karmäëi mayi dåñöe ’khilätmani
Having awakened faith in the narrations of My glories, being disgusted with
all  kinds  of  material  activities,  knowing  that  all  varieties  of  sense  gratification
leads to misery, but still being unable to renounce all sense enjoyment, My devotee
should  remain  satisfied  and  worship  Me  with  great  faith  and  conviction.  Even
though he is sometimes engaged in sense enjoyment, My devotee knows that this
will lead to a miserable result and so he sincerely repents such activities.
When  an  intelligent  devotee  constantly  engages  in  My  loving  devotional
service as prescribed by Me, his heart becomes firmly situated in Me. Thus all
material desires within the heart are soon destroyed.
When a living entity directly sees Me, who is the indwelling Supersoul of all
living entities, then all his false ego, doubts and reactions of karma are at once
destroyed. (Çrémad-Bhägavatam 11.20.27-29, 1.2.21)
sa cacära mahém etäà saàyatätmendriyänilaù
bhikñärthaà nagara-grämän asaìgo ‘lakñito ‘viçat
He wandered throughout the world, carefully controlling his senses, mind, and
intelligence. To beg alms, he traveled alone through numerous towns and villages,
hiding his true spiritual position so that he was not recognized by others.
PURPORT
The brähmaëa from Avanté became free from all bad association by remaining aloof
from those who desire material enjoyment and liberation. He had no desire to acquire
name and fame to impress others as he began to maintain himself by begging alms from
door to door. In the Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 19.151), it is said:
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
560 Chapter 17
brahmäëòa bhramite kona bhägyavän jéva
guru-kåñëa-prasäde päya bhakti-latä-béja
According  to  their  karma,  all  living  entities  are  wandering  throughout  the
universe. Some of them are being elevated to the upper planetary systems, and
some  are  going  down  to  the  lower  planetary  systems.  Out  of  many  millions
of  wandering  living  entities,  one  who  is  very  fortunate  gets  an  opportunity  to
associate with a bona fide spiritual master, by the grace of Kåñëa. By the mercy of
both Kåñëa and the spiritual master, such a person receives the seed of the creeper
of devotional service.
The acceptance of tridaëòa sannyäsa is an indication of one’s complete dedication
to the devotional service of the Supreme Lord. The three rods of the sannyäsé’s daëòa
indicate that his body, mind, and speech are fully engaged in the devotional service of
the Lord. The engagement of one’s body, mind, and speech in the service of the Lord
enables one to manifest all good qualities, such as forgiveness, detachment, and freedom
from pride and material desires. Anyone who fully engages in the service of the Lord,
following in the footsteps of the previous learned devotees, will surely attain shelter at
the Lord’s lotus feet.
taà vai pravayasaà bhikñum avadhütam asaj-janäù
dåñövä paryabhavan bhadra bahvébhiù paribhütibhiù
O gentle Uddhava, upon seeing him as an old, dirty beggar, uncultured people taunted
and insulted him with many harsh words.
COMMENTARY
Mischievous  persons  took  pleasure  in  reproaching  the  old  sannyäsé.  The  word
paribhütibhiù means “various kinds of reprimands.”
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Song of the AvantéBrähmaëa
kecit tri-veëuà jagåhur eke pätraà kamaëòalum
péöhaà caike ‘kña-sütraà ca kanthäà céräëi kecana
pradäya ca punas täni darçitäny ädadur muneù
Some of these miscreants took away his sannyäsa rod, some took his begging bowl,
some  took  his  deerskin  äsana,  some  took  his  chanting  beads,  and  some  took  his  torn,
ragged clothing. Sometimes they pretended to return these things, only to conceal them
once again.
COMMENTARY
Someone  took  away  his  sannyäsa  rod  and  when  that  person  was  about  to  return
it,  someone  else  snatched  it  away.  In  this  way,  people  mistreated  the  brähmaëa  from
Avanté.
annaà ca bhaikñya-sampannaà bhuïjänasya sarit-taöe
mütrayanti ca päpiñöhäù ñöhévanty asya ca mürdhani
When the brähmaëa would sit down by the side of a river to eat the food that he
collected by begging, sinful people would come and pass urine on it and then spit on his
head.
COMMENTARY
These wicked people urinated on his food and spat on his head.
yata-väcaà väcayanti täòayanti na vakti cet
tarjayanty apare vägbhiù steno ‘yam iti vädinaù
badhnanti rajjvä taà kecid badhyatäà badhyatäm iti
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
562 Chapter 17
Although he had taken a vow of silence, foolish people would try to make him speak,
and if he did not utter a word, they would beat him with sticks. There were others who
would say, “This man is a thief,” and then they would tie him up with a rope.
kñipanty eke ‘vajänanta eña dharma-dhvajaù çaöhaù
kñéëa-vitta imäà våttim agrahét sva-janojjhitaù
They would insult him by saying, “This man is a hypocrite and a cheat. He lost all
his money and so his family rejected him. Now he has put on the garb of a sannyäséjust
to fill his belly.”
COMMENTARY
Some people said, “This man is a hypocrite. He earns his livelihood by showing off
his sannyäsa daëòa. He is a cheater and deceives innocent people. He has dressed like a
saint because he lost all his money.”
aho eña mahä-säro dhåtimän giri-räò iva
maunena sädhayaty arthaà baka-vad dåòha-niçcayaù
ity eke vihasanty enam eke durvätayanti ca
taà babandhur nirurudhur yathä kréòanakaà dvijam
Some would ridicule him by saying, “Just see how this powerful sage is as steadfast
as the Himalaya Mountains. While remaining silent, he is pursuing his goal with great
determination, like a duck.” Other passed foul air on him, and some bound him with rope
and kept him captive, like a pet animal.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Song of the AvantéBrähmaëa
COMMENTARY
Some  people  would  facetiously  say  that  the  brähmaëa  was  very  powerful  and
unwavering, like a mountain. Some people passed foul air in front of his mouth. Others
bound  him  with  rope  and  threw  him  into  a  dungeon,  just  as  one  puts  a  parrot  in  a
cage.
PURPORT
As a result of giving up false pride, one acquires the quality of tolerance. Due to their
deceitful mentality, non-devotees are always prone to attack the surrendered devotees
of the Supreme Lord in various ways. Only those who cultivate the quality of humility,
feeling themselves to be lower than the straw in the street, refuse to become entangled
by engagement in gross or subtle material enjoyment.
evaà sa bhautikaà duùkhaà daivikaà daihikaà ca yat
bhoktavyam ätmano diñöaà präptaà präptam abudhyata
In  this  way,  the  brähmaëa  repeatedly  suffered  the  threefold  material  miseries—
ädhyätmika, ädhibhautika, and ädhidaivika—understanding them to be allotted to him
by providence, and therefore unavoidable.
COMMENTARY
Adhibhautika miseries are those caused by other living entities, ädhyätmika miseries
are those caused by one’s own body and mind, and ädhidaivika miseries are those caused
by the demigods who control the forces of nature, such as heat and cold.
PURPORT
The  conditioned  soul  identifies  with  his  material  body  and  because  of  this
misconception, it is very difficult for him to tolerate the miserable conditions of material
existence. The threefold miseries can be tolerated only by one who has taken shelter of the
lotus feet of Çré Nityänanda Prabhu, the exalted elder brother of the most magnanimous
Çré Kåñëa Caitanya, who is non-different from the son of King of Vraja. Those who are
endeavoring to remain fixed in devotional service to the Lord do not become agitated
by the words and actions of atheists because they know that the non-devotees’ envy is
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
564 Chapter 17
a  natural  manifestation  of  their  conditional  life.  Understanding  that  the  atheists  are
acting helplessly under the control of the material nature, they consider it their duty to
forgive them. That tridaëòi sannyäsé of Avanté could realize these principles within his
self as a result of his sincere surrender to the Lord.
paribhüta imäà gäthäm agäyata narädhamaiù
pätayadbhiù sva dharma-stho dhåtim ästhäya sättvikém
Even though low-class men ridiculed him in various ways in the hopes of making him
fall down from his position, he remained steadfast in his determination. Keeping himself
fixed in the mode of goodness, he began singing this song.
COMMENTARY
Those  who  were  the  lowest  of  mankind  tried  their  best  to  deviate  the  Avanté
brähmaëa  from  his  determination  to  remain  fixed  in  Kåñëa  consciousness.  All  such
attempts had no effect, however, because he remained firmly fixed in his resolve while
singing the song that is recorded in the following verses.
The phrase sätvikéà dhåti is explained in Bhagavad-gétä (18.33):
dhåtyä yayä dhärayate manaù-präëendriya-kriyäù
yogenävyabhicäriëyä dhåtiù sä pärtha sättviké
O son of Påthä, that determination which is unbreakable, which is sustained
with steadfastness by yoga practice, and which thus controls the activities of the
mind, life and senses is determination in the mode of goodness.
PURPORT
Those who are envious of the Lord’s devotees are certainly the lowest of men and
are destined to traverse the path to hell in the near future. Indeed, atheists take pleasure
in  disturbing  the  devotees,  either  by  jeering  at  them  or  even  by  becoming  violent.  In
spite of all such torments, however, the devotees remain tolerant, being determined to
stay fixed in the mode of goodness, as advised by the Lord. As described by Çréla Rüpa
Gosvämé in Çré Upadeçämåta(1):
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Song of the AvantéBrähmaëa
väco vegaà manasaù krodha-vegaà
jihvä-vegam udaropastha-vegam
etän vegän yo viñaheta dhéraù
sarväm apémäà påthivéà sa çiñyät
A sober person who can tolerate the urge to speak, the mind’s demands, the
actions  of  anger  and  the  urges  of  the  tongue,  belly  and  genitals  is  qualified  to
make disciples all over the world.
dvija uväca
näyaà jano me sukha-duùkha-hetur na devatätmä graha-karma-käläù
manaù paraà käraëam ämananti saàsära-cakraà parivartayed yat
The brähmaëa said: These people are not the cause of my happiness and distress.
Neither are the demigods, my own body, the positions of the planets, my karma, or time.
Rather,  it  is  the  mind  alone  that  causes  happiness  and  distress  and  perpetuates  one’s
bondage to the vicious cycle of repeated birth and death.
COMMENTARY
After  careful  deliberation,  the  Avanté  brähmaëa  realized  that  it  was  not  actually
the miscreants who were the cause of his distress. Did he think that maybe they were
harassing him under the instigation of someone else? The answer is given in this verse:
“Neither the demigods, the body, nor the planets are causing me distress. It is the mind
that is the actual cause of one’s happiness and distress.” It is stated in the Vedas that it
is the mind that sees, hears, and makes one move here and there.
PURPORT
Those who are averse to the service of the Supreme Lord must live within the cycle
of repeated birth and death.
éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäà håd-deçe ’rjuna tiñöhati
bhrämayan sarva-bhütäni yanträrüòhäni mäyayä
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
566 Chapter 17
The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone’s heart, O Arjuna, and is directing
the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine, made of the
material energy.  (Bhagavad-gétä 18.61)
According to the purport of this verse from the Bhagavad-gétä, mental speculators
must wander about in the cycle of birth and death, driven by the mind, under the direction
of the Supreme Lord. The wheel of time causes the living entity, who is the knower of
the  field  of  activities,  to  experience  the  changing  nature  of  material  existence.  The
Avanté brähmaëa understood his mind alone to be the source  of all inauspiciousness,
despite  the  fact  that  miscreants,  the  demigods,  planets,  one’s  karma,  and  time  are  no
doubt apparent causes.
In this regard, one can carefully consider this verse:
anyera hådaya—mana,  mora mana—våndävana,
‘mane’ ‘vane’ eka kari’ jäni
tähäì tomära pada-dvaya,  karäha yadi udaya,
tabe tomära pürëa kåpä mäni
For most people, the mind and heart are one, but because My mind is never
separated  from  Våndävana,  I  consider  My  mind  and  Våndävana  to  be  one.  My
mind  is  already  Våndävana,  and  since  You  like  Våndävana,  will  You  please
place Your lotus feet there? I would deem that Your full mercy. (Çré Caitanya-
caritämåta Madhya 13.137)
mano guëän vai såjate baléyas tataç ca karmäëi vilakñaëäni
çukläni kåñëäny atha lohitäni tebhyaù sa-varëäù såtayo bhavanti
The powerful mind manifests the functions of the modes of nature, from which evolve
the activities of the modes of goodness, passion, and ignorance. From the interaction of
the modes of nature, the various species of life evolve.
COMMENTARY
The mind is habituated to hankering after beautiful women and wealth. Even if one
understands  the  fault  of  engaging  in  earning  money  for  sense  gratification,  the  mind
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Song of the AvantéBrähmaëa
will  stubbornly  insist  that  without  wealth,  even  religious  rituals  cannot  be  properly
performed. After all, it takes money to procure flower garlands, ghee, and sandalwood
paste.  In  this  way,  the  mind  drives  one  on  and  on  in  the  feverish  search  for  money.
The  combination  of  the  three  modes  of  material  natures  awards  one  a  material  body
whereby  one  sometimes  identifies  himself  as  being  in  a  high  status  of  life,  sometimes
in a low status, and sometimes somewhere in between. These conceptions are material
designations generated from the modes of nature, and they arrange themselves according
to the tendency of the powerful mind to enjoy temporary sense gratification.
PURPORT
The  materially  absorbed  mind  of  the  conditioned  souls  who  are  averse  to  Lord
Kåñëa’s devotional service is under the influence of the three material qualities. When
the conditioned soul is engrossed in the mode of goodness, he considers the cultivation of
knowledge and his reputation as an honest man as all-important. When absorbed in the
mode of passion, one’s attachment to family and social position become prominent, and
when one is immersed in the mode of ignorance, one simply thinks that the gratification
of his senses is the be-all of his existence. All such conceptions of piety, impiety, and a
mixture of both, are products of the mind. Under the influence of the material modes,
one sometimes identifies oneself as a demigod, a king, a rich capitalist, a wise scholar, and
so on. These bodily conceptions are illusions born from the mental qualities. Whether
the materially contaminated mind is absorbed in the mood of an enjoyer, or the mood of
a renunciate, in either case, the spirit soul forgets his constitutional existence.
anéha ätmä manasä saméhatä hiraë-mayo mat-sakha udvicañöe
manaù sva-liìgaà parigåhya kämän juñan nibaddho guëa-saìgato ‘sau
Although He is present with me in this body, the Supersoul is not entangled because
He exists eternally beyond the darkness of ignorance, and thus does not identify with the
material body and mind. As my well-wishing friend, He simply witnesses my activities,
remaining neutral. On the other hand, I, the minute spirit soul, identify the mind, which
is like a mirror reflecting external reality, as my very self. In this way, I am engaged in
attempting to enjoy the objects of the senses, under the dictation of the three modes of
material nature.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
568 Chapter 17
COMMENTARY
Does this mean that only the mind suffers the material existence, and not the soul?
The  answer  is  no.  There  are  two  souls  within  the  body,  one  is  the  Supersoul,  who  is
untouched by the mind’s influence, and the other is the infinitesimal spirit soul, who
is  under  the  influence  of  the  materially  absorbed  mind.  Although  the  Supersoul  is
present within the body as the controller of the mind, He is unaffected by its functions
because  He  is  full  of  transcendental  knowledge  and  the  master  of  unlimited  spiritual
energies. He is independent and He is the best friend of the spirit soul. His knowledge
never deteriorates as He observes everything as a witness. On the other hand, the spirit
soul  accepts  the  subtle  body  of  mind,  intelligence  and  false  ego  as  the  self,  becomes
conditioned by the mind and its resultant actions, and remains entangled in the bodily
concept of life while trying to enjoy the objects of the senses. Due to the illusion created
by the mind, the spirit soul suffers while remaining in material existence.
PURPORT
If  a  conditioned  soul  comes  to  understand  that  dependence  on  the  mind  simply
produces misery, and is informed that service to Lord Hari is his constitutional position,
the  desire  for  material  enjoyment,  or  for  renunciation  of  material  activities,  gradually
diminishes.  To  act  in  our  relationship  with  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  is
certainly  the  constitutional  duty  of  the  spirit  soul.  When  the  spirit  soul  gives  up  his
constitutional engagement and becomes conditioned by the external energy of the Lord,
he  remains  engrossed  in  contemplating  the  so-called  happiness  of  temporary  sense
gratification, not realizing its insignificance.
When  one  advances  on  the  path  of  cultivation  of  spiritual  knowledge,  lending
submissive  aural  reception  to  the  transcendental  sound  vibration,  he  can  understand
the  purport  of  the  verse  beginning  with  dvä  suparëä.  It  is  only  after  accepting  the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  as  the  object  of  one  of  the  five  types  of  rati  that
one can distance himself from the influence of the three modes of material nature by
controlling the turbulent mind.
Çré  Gaurasundara  instructed  that  the  service  of  the  supreme  transcendental
personality, Çré Kåñëa, as described in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, is the fifth dimension of
human existence, to be cultivated after finishing all aspiration for attaining perfection
in dharma, artha, käma and mokña. The subtle body is dissolved at the time of perfection
and this is technically known as vastusiddhi. At this time, one becomes situated on the
platform of pure Kåñëa consciousness, under the direction of the pure devotees of the
Lord, thus enabling him to develop his particular loving relationship with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Song of the AvantéBrähmaëa
dänaà sva-dharmo niyamo yamaç ca çrutaà ca karmäëi ca sad-vratäni
sarve mano-nigraha-lakñaëäntäù paro hi yogo manasaù samädhiù
Giving in charity, performing prescribed duties, the observance of regulative principles,
hearing from the scriptures, pious works, and purifying vows all have as their final aim
the subduing of the mind. Indeed, concentration of the mind on the Supreme is the goal
of yoga.
COMMENTARY
To  make  spiritual  advancement,  it  is  essential  to  control  the  mind,  which  creates
many obstacles if allowed to roam freely. Activities such as giving charity are performed
with the aim of controlling the mind. Indeed, the ultimate fruit of all kinds of sädhana
is to regulate the mind. To control the mind is the goal of all types of yoga practice.
PURPORT
Pious  activities,  such  as  giving  charity,  fulfilling  one’s  occupational  duties,
controlling  the  mind,  controlling  the  senses,  studying  the  Vedas,  observing  religious
vows, and so on, are aimed at purifying and controlling the mind. Controlling the mind
by  meditation  is  essential  because  when  the  mind  is  undisturbed,  one  can  gradually
realize the temporary nature of even pious activities so that one becomes determined to
act on the transcendental platform. Because karma-yoga, haöha-yoga, jïäna-yoga, and
raja-yoga are materialistically conceived, they do not award one factual understanding
of the Absolute Truth.
samähitaà yasya manaù praçäntaà dänädibhiù kià vada tasya kåtyam
asaàyataà yasya mano vinaçyad dänädibhiç ced aparaà kim ebhiù
If one’s mind is perfectly controlled, what is the need for performing ritualistic activities,
and pious works, such as giving in charity? And if one’s mind remains uncontrolled, being
merged in ignorance, of what use are these activities for him?
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
570 Chapter 17
COMMENTARY
Learned transcendentalists give utmost importance to controlling the mind. If the
mind is controlled, what is the use of engaging in the various processes that are meant
to control it? And, if in spite of performing many religious activities, the mind is still not
controlled, what was the use of performing all those activities?
PURPORT
In this connection, one should consider this verse from the Närada-païcarätra:
ärädhito yadi haris tapasä tataù kià
närädhito yadi haris tapasä tataù kim
antar bahir yadi haris tapasä tataù kià
näntar bahir yadi haris tapasä tataù Kim
“If one is worshiping Lord Hari, what is the use of performing extraneous
penances? And if one is not worshiping Lord Hari, no such penances will save
one. If one can understand that Lord Hari is all-pervading, within and without,
what is the need of performing penances? And if one is not able to understand
that Hari is all-pervading, all his penances are useless.”
mano-vaçe ‘nye hy abhavan sma devä manaç ca nänyasya vaçaà sameti
bhéñmo hi devaù sahasaù sahéyän yuïjyäd vaçe taà sa hi deva-devaù
The demigods, who control the senses of the conditioned souls, are also under the
control  of  this  mind,  but  the  mind  is  not  controlled  by  anyone,  because  it  is  stronger
than the strongest. Indeed, the mind is the cause of fear for even mystic yogis. Therefore,
anyone who can control his mind becomes the master of the senses.
COMMENTARY
One may inquire, “Besides controlling the mind, is there need for a separate endeavor
to  control  the  senses?”  In  this  verse,  the  answer  is  given  that  there  is  no  need  for  a
separate endeavor to control the senses because one who has conquered the mind finds
that his senses are automatically under control. The demigods, who control the senses
of the conditioned souls are themselves under the control of the mind.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Song of the AvantéBrähmaëa
Even  great  yogis  are  afraid  of  the  formidable  mind,  which  is  stronger  than  the
strongest and braver than the bravest. Therefore, anyone who has learned to control his
mind is certainly to be considered a great hero. It is stated in the Vedas, “Everything has
come about by the influence of the mind, which is extremely difficult to control. The
mind is like a formidable master, who is the bravest of all.”
PURPORT
The  materially  contaminated  mind  is  generally  eager  to  enjoy  sense  gratification,
although  it  sometimes  adopts  the  path  of  dry  renunciation.  In  order  to  transcend  the
limitations of material enjoyment and dry renunciation, one must learn to engage the
mind at the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord. If the mind is controlled then all the senses
are  automatically  controlled. The mind collects the impressions of the external world
through  the  medium  of  the  senses  and  thus  it  is  sensual  perception  that  constantly
disturbs the mind.
tam durjayaà çatrum asahya-vegam arun-tudaà tan na vijitya kecit
kurvanty asad-vigraham atra martyair miträëy udäséna-ripün vimüòhäù
There are many people who fail to conquer this irrepressible enemy, the mind, whose
urges are intolerable and who torments the heart. As a result, many people are completely
bewildered and create useless quarrels with others, concluding that other people are either
their friends, enemies, or parties indifferent to them.
COMMENTARY
The word aru means “the heart.” Instead of controlling the mind, which gives pain
to the heart and senses, a foolish person creates enmity with others, being impelled by
the uncontrolled mind. Being in the bodily conception of life, he treats some people as
favorable, some as unfavorable, and others as neutral.
PURPORT
The  mind’s  business  is  accepting  and  rejecting.  Attachment  and  hatred,  as  well
as  friendship  and  enmity  are  conceptions  existing  within  the  materially  conditioned
mind.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
572 Chapter 17
dehaà mano-mätram imaà gåhétvä mamäham ity andha-dhiyo manuñyäù
eño ‘ham anyo ‘yam iti bhrameëa duranta-päre tamasi bhramanti
Persons who identify with the material body, which is a product of the mind, possess
bewildered intelligence, thinking in terms of “I” and “mine.” Because of their illusion of
“this is I, this is my relative, and this is an outsider,” they wander in endless darkness.
COMMENTARY
This  verse  describes  how  one  becomes  entangled  in  illusion.  According  to  the
dictation of the mind, one must accept a material body, thinking it to be the self, and
thus one considers everything related to the body as “mine.” This is how the conditioned
souls wander within the formidable material existence.
PURPORT
Those who maintain a vision of duality, thinking the material body to be “I” and
everything in relation to the body to be “mine” certainly continue to wander in the vast
kingdom of material existence. Differentiation in behavior arises due to discrimination.
Those who remain in the bodily concept of life become offenders at the lotus feet of the
holy name, and thus invite aversion to the service of the Supreme Lord.
janas tu hetuù sukha-duùkhayoç cet kim ätmanaç cätra hi bhaumayos tat
jihväà kvacit sandaçati sva-dadbhis tad-vedanäyäà katamäya kupyet
If you argue that the miscreants are the causes of my suffering then what about the
eternal soul? Happiness and distress are the results of the contact of the senses with their
objects, and do not affect the eternal soul. If someone bites his tongue, who can he blame
for his pain?
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Song of the AvantéBrähmaëa
COMMENTARY
It  should  be  clearly  understood  that  the  mind  is  the  cause  of  one’s  happiness  and
distress. Although bodily pleasure and pain are felt by the soul, one must tolerate such
duality,  understanding it to be a creation of one’s  own material mind.  The gross and
subtle bodies, which are transformation of material elements, are the field of activities
for  the  soul,  who  is  distinct  from  these  coverings.  If  one  accidentally  bites  his  tongue
or  lip,  he  cannot  become  angry  and  pull  out  his  teeth.  Similarly,  all  living  beings  are
individual  parts  and  parcels  of  God,  and  thus  non-different  from  each  other.  All  of
them are meant to serve the Supreme Lord in spiritual equality. If the living beings give
up their master’s service and instead quarrel among themselves, they will be forced to
suffer by the laws of nature.
PURPORT
Just as it is not proper to pull out one’s teeth if he happens to bite his tongue, one
should not retaliate against an offense committed by another because every living entity
is part and parcel of the supreme whole and therefore not different from one another.
The  servant  spirit  soul  and  the  master  Supersoul  are  always  meant  to  live  in  perfect
harmony. If the spirit soul exhibits opposition to his master and well-wisher, or creates
conflict  among  his  fellow  souls,  then  he  is  acting  against  his  own  self-interest.  It  is
ignorance for one to say, “I have become happy or distressed because of the activities of
another  person.”  The  spirit  soul  is  not  actually  subjected  to  temporary  happiness  and
distress. Happiness and distress are the result of the interaction of the external objects
of this world.
Because all living entities are servants of the Supreme Lord, if they somehow oppose
one another, this indicates that they have become indifferent to the Lord’s service, and
this  aversion  to  the  performance  of  their  respective  duties  will  progressively  become
more and more prominent. Exalted devotees of the Lord are self-realized souls who know
that all living entities are servants of the Supreme Lord. Servants have no other duty
than service to their master. By giving up the master’s service, one becomes entangled
either in love or quarrel and as a result, one will have to experience either happiness or
distress. The living entities’ relationships with each other should be based on friendship
in relationship with the Supersoul.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
574 Chapter 17
duùkhasya hetur yadi devatäs tu kim ätmanas tatra vikärayos tat
yad aìgam aìgena nihanyate kvacit krudhyeta kasmai puruñaù sva-dehe
If  you  say  that  the  demigods  who  control  the  bodily  senses  cause  suffering,  still,
such suffering cannot apply to the spirit soul. Acting and being acted upon are merely
interactions of the senses and their presiding deities. When one limb of the body attacks
another limb, with whom can the person residing in that body be angry?
COMMENTARY
Even  if  the  demigods  are  considered  to  be  responsible  for  one’s  happiness  and
distress, what has that got to do with the spirit soul? Actually, the demigods play a major
role in human beings’ happiness and distress. If the hand of a person points to the face
of another and curses, “May you suffer from white leprosy,” then the demigods, Indra
and Agni, who are predominating deities of the face become insulted. However, this has
nothing to do with the eternal soul. The example is given here of the body. If one slaps
the face of another person, then it amounts to slapping the demigod, Indra, because he
is the controlling deity of the face.
PURPORT
Material distress is actually a superfluous condition for the living entities. Even if
the demigods are accepted as the cause of distress, there is no distress felt by self-realized
souls.  Self-realized  persons,  who  are  devoid  of  a  mundane  conception  of  life,  do  not
invite inauspiciousness by creating rivalry with others. Rather, they are the kind friends
of all living beings, irrespective of how others treat them.
If one limb of the body accidentally harms another limb, the proprietor of the body
does not take revenge against the offending limb. Similarly, the Supreme Lord does not
take sides in a quarrel between two of His energies. He mercifully gives them the right
to serve Him, while remaining their well-wishing friend.
ätmä yadi syät sukha-duùkha-hetuù kim anyatas tatra nija-svabhävaù
na hy ätmano ‘nyad yadi tan måñä syät krudhyeta kasmän na sukhaà na duùkham
If the spirit soul is considered the cause of happiness and distress, then there is no
reason to become angry with others, because happiness and distress would be the nature
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Song of the AvantéBrähmaëa
of the soul. According to this theory, nothing exists besides the spirit soul. If one perceives
something else besides the soul—that must be considered illusion. Therefore, what would
be the cause for anger against others?
COMMENTARY
A dead body does not feel pleasure or pain, and so it must be concluded that our
happiness  and  distress  are  due  to  our  consciousness,  which  is  the  nature  of  the  soul.
It  is  not,  however,  the  original  function  of  the  soul  to  enjoy  material  happiness  and
suffer  material  distress.  These  are  produced  by  the  ignorant  conception  of  bodily
identification, which is the action of false ego. Our involvement in sense gratification
drags our consciousness into the material body, where it must experience the inevitable
bodily pains and pleasures.
PURPORT
If the soul is imagined to be the cause of happiness and distress, then one should
consider  such  happiness  and  distress  to  be  his  nature  and  therefore  should  not  blame
others. The person who gives pain and the person who suffers it are actually part and
parcel of the same Supreme Person. Therefore, any conflict that arises between people
on the mundane platform should be understood as superficial and due to an absence of
self-realization.
Enjoyment of the objects of the senses is not the true nature of the spirit soul, but
exists only in contact with matter. Knowing this very well, one should not foolishly try
to  maximize  his  material  happiness  while  simultaneously  attempting  to  minimize  his
material distress. After all, happiness and distress are concomitant factors in material
existence.
The  characteristics  of  the  spirit  soul  only  manifest  in  the  spiritual  world.  In  the
transcendental  abode  of  the  Lord,  there  is  no  material  distress,  even  in  the  case  of
separation from the Lord. The insignificant happiness that we experience in this world,
which is actually an absence of distress, has no existence in the spiritual world. It should
be understood that the pure spirit soul is naturally inclined toward the service of the
Supreme Lord because that is his constitutional position.
grahä nimittaà sukha-duùkhayoç cet kim ätmano ‘jasya janasya te vai
grahair grahasyaiva vadanti péòäà krudhyeta kasmai puruñas tato ‘nyaù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
576 Chapter 17
If we suppose that the planets are the cause of happiness and distress, then where is
the relationship with the eternal spirit soul? The planets can only cause happiness and
distress for that which has taken birth. Expert astrologers have explained that the planets
only cause distress to one another. Therefore, because the spirit soul is distinct from the
material body and the planets, against who should he vent his anger?
COMMENTARY
Even  if  it  is  accepted  that  the  stars  and  planets  are  the  cause  of  happiness  and
distress,  this  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  unborn  spirit  soul.  The  body  is  possessed  by
the  soul—not  that  the  soul  is  part  of  the  body.  According  to  expert  astrologers,  the
positions of the stars, planets, and constellations at the time of birth influence a person’s
nature. Thus, it is the material body that suffers miseries caused by the planets and not
the soul, which is separate from the body.
PURPORT
Astrologers say that the happiness and distress of the living entities is caused by the
planets.  In  the  spiritual  realm,  there  is  no  occurrence  of  material  distress.  Therefore,
the  influence  of  the  planets  does  not  apply  to  the  eternal  spirit  soul,  but  only  to  the
temporary  material  body.  Self-realized  souls  never  become  exultant  or  morose  on
account  of  the  pleasant  or  unpleasant  predictions  of  astrologers.  Planetary  influences
are limited to the material body and mind. There is no difference between the soul of a
planet and the soul of any other embodied being. Both are eternal, minute spirit souls,
part and parcel of the Supreme Lord. It is only the embodiment that causes one to make
a distinction between the two.
karmästu hetuù sukha-duùkhayoç cet kim ätmanas tad dhi jaòäjaòatve
dehas tv acit puruño ‘yaà suparëaù krudhyeta kasmai na hi karma mülam
If  we  assume  that  karma  is  the  cause  of  happiness  and  distress,  we  still  are  not
considering  the  eternal  soul.  Karma,  or  fruitive  activity,  takes  place  when  there  is  a
conscious spirit soul and a material body that undergoes the transformation of happiness
and distress as a reaction to work. Because the body has no life, it cannot be the actual
recipient  of  happiness  and  distress,  nor  can  the  soul,  who  is  ultimately  aloof  from  the
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Song of the AvantéBrähmaëa
material  body.  Because  karma  has  no  ultimate  basis  in  either  the  body  or  the  soul,  at
whom can one become angry?
COMMENTARY
If  we  accept  karma  as  the  cause  of  happiness  and  distress,  we  must  consider  how
fruitive activities are performed by the conditioned souls and not the souls themselves.
The body is a dull matter whereas the soul is pure consciousness. The pure spirit soul
has no factual relationship with the material body, just as light has no connection with
darkness. Considering this, at whom should one become angry?
PURPORT
If  the  cause  of  happiness  and  distress  is  attributed  to  the  activities  of  the  living
entities, there is still no cause for anger because fruitive activities are performed under
the impulse of the three modes of material nature. The owner of the body is the spirit
soul, and the body itself is nothing but dead matter. Therefore, the conditioned soul’s
absorption  in  the  material  body  is  due  to  ignorance  and  cannot  be  considered  as
factual.
kälas tu hetuù sukha-duùkhayoç cet kim ätmanas tatra tad-ätmako ‘sau
nägner hi täpo na himasya tat syät krudhyeta kasmai na parasya dvandvam
If time is accepted as the cause of happiness and distress, then that experience cannot
apply  to  the  spirit  soul,  because  the  spirit  soul  is  an  expansion  of  the  Lord’s  spiritual
potency  and  time  is  also  a  manifestation  of  the  spiritual  energy  of  the  Supreme  Lord.
Certainly a fire does not burn its own flames, nor does the cold harm snow. The spirit
soul  is  transcendental  and  beyond  the  experience  of  material  happiness  and  distress.
Therefore, at whom should one become angry?
COMMENTARY
If  time  is  accepted  as  the  cause  of  happiness  and  distress,  this  still  cannot  affect
the eternal spirit soul. The spirit soul is part and parcel of the Supreme Brahman, just
as much time is a representation of the Supreme Brahman. The example of fire and its
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
578 Chapter 17
flames is appropriate in this regard. Flames cannot be burnt by fire, and snow cannot be
harmed by cold. Considering this, at whom should one get angry?
PURPORT
Snow cannot suffer because of cold, and flames cannot suffer on account of the heat
of  the  fire.  Similarly,  the  spirit  soul  and  time  are  both  manifestations  of  the  internal
energy of the Supreme Lord. In conditional life, there are sometimes feelings of happiness
and sometimes feelings of distress, due to ignorance. When the soul is transcendentally
situated in his relationship with the Supreme Lord, there is no question of happiness or
distress.
na kenacit kväpi kathaïcanäsya dvandvoparägaù parataù parasya
yathähamaù saàsåti-rüpiëaù syäd evaà prabuddho na bibheti bhütaiù
The false ego, which manifests the visible material creation, is subjected to happiness
and distress. The soul, however, who is transcendental to matter, can never actually be
affected by material happiness and distress in any place, under any circumstance, or by
the agency of any person. When one realizes this fact, he will no longer have any fear
from any material condition.
COMMENTARY
The  brähmaëa  has  countered  various  philosophies  regarding  the  happiness  and
distress  experienced  by  the  conditioned  souls.  Here,  he  counters  any  other  possible
explanation. Due to false ego, the conditioned soul identifies with his gross and subtle
coverings  and  thus  dreams  that  he  is  suffering  or  enjoying  that  which  has  no  real
relationship with his self. Who then is the cause of one’s suffering? It is simply due to
illusion that one suffers in material existence. False ego, which is one of the constituents
of the subtle body, of which the mind is the leader, is the real cause of happiness and
distress,  and  not  anything  else.  The  word  yatha  in  this  verse  means  “certainly.”  The
word saàsåti refers to “the bondage of material existence.” Normally, one who is awake
is not afraid of ghosts. In the same way, one who is awake to self-realization has nothing
more to fear from material existence. By nature, the soul is pure and so time or karma
cannot be the actual cause of his distress. It is because of illusion, or the misconception
of  accepting  the  material  body  as  the  self,  that  the  eternal  soul  feels  temporary
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Song of the AvantéBrähmaëa
manifestations of happiness and distress. This is all the action of the false ego, which is
born of ignorance. This is the sum and substance of this chapter.
PURPORT
The  conditioned  soul  imagines  the  existence  of  happiness  and  distress  as  a  result
of  his  aversion  to  the  Lord’s  service.  However,  when  he  wakes  up  from  his  sleep,  he
understands  that  the  dream  of  happiness  and  distress  does  not  belong  to  him.  Under
the influence of false ego, the living entities become absorbed in material existence and
as  a  result,  forget  their  actual  identity.  This  condition  of  life  is  dissolved  for  one  who
is awake to the reality of Kåñëa consciousness. Therefore, there is no need to be afraid
of the awkward situations that arise from being absorbed on the bodily platform. The
feelings of happiness, distress, and fear that are products of the material nature cannot
overwhelm  the  self-realized  souls,  who  are  situated  firmly  in  the  devotional  service  of
the Supreme Lord.
etäà sa ästhäya parätma-niñöhäm adhyäsitäà pürvatamair maharñibhiù
ahaà tariñyämi duranta-päraà tamo mukundäìghri-niñevayaiva
I shall cross over the insurmountable ocean of nescience by being firmly fixed in the
service of the lotus feet of Kåñëa. This was approved by the previous äcäryas, who were
fixed in firm devotion to the Lord, Paramätmä, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
COMMENTARY
Did the brähmaëa suddenly remember the pure devotion for the Lord that he had
possessed in his previous life, but was obstructed for some reason? Is it for that reason
that he has now developed detachment, become indifferent to happiness and distress,
and resolved to serve the Lord’s lotus feet while taking pleasure in chanting and dancing
in ecstasy? The brähmaëa appears to exude great confidence, saying, “I will advance in
self-realization, knowing that the soul is distinct from the material body, being a part
and  parcel  of  the  Supersoul.  There  is  no  doubt  that  I  will  cross  beyond  the  ocean  of
ignorance  by  being  firmly  fixed  in  the  devotional  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord.”  One
might  question,  “Will  the  brähmaëa  depend  only  on  the  Supreme  Lord  and  no  one
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
580 Chapter 17
else?” The answer is that he will cross over the ocean of ignorance by serving the lotus
feet of Lord Kåñëa, as approved by the mahäjanas.
PURPORT
When one gives up seeing things in terms of material duality, due to cultivating an
understanding of the Absolute Truth, one can realized himself as the eternal servant of
the Supreme Lord. In order to cross over the formidable ocean of birth and death, the
Avanté  brähmaëa  became  determined  to  accept  the  path  of  devotional  service  to  the
Supreme Lord that had been traversed by the previous äcäryas.
çré-bhagavän uväca
nirvidya nañöa-draviëe gata-klamaù pravrajya gäà paryaöamäna ittham
niräkåto ‘sadbhir api sva-dharmäd akampito ‘müà munir äha gäthäm
Lord  Çré  Kåñëa  said:  Thus  becoming  detached  after  the  loss  of  his  wealth,  the
brähmaëa gave up his moroseness. He left home, taking sannyäsa, and began to travel
over the earth. Even when insulted by uncivilized fools, he remained fixed in his duty and
chanted this song.
COMMENTARY
The  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  narrated  this  story  to  give  Uddhava  some
very important instructions.
PURPORT
Many  people  consider  the  accumulation  of  worldly  assets  and  service  to  family
members as svadharma, or one’s duty. However, the scriptures repeatedly advise us that
human life is meant for self-realization. Those who take heed of such instructions may
give up the hard labor required to amass more and more money, for the satisfaction of
one’s wife and children, and take shelter of the association of saintly persons. By engaging
in the devotional service of the Lord while remaining aloof from unwanted association,
one  can  remain  steady  on  the  transcendental  platform.  Such  sincere  devotees  should
sing  this  song  of  the  Avanté  sannyäsé    to  further  their  advancement  in  spiritual  life.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Song of the AvantéBrähmaëa
However, if one is not capable of listening to the song of this  sannyäsé, then one will
certainly remain an obedient servant of material illusion.
sukha-duùkha-prado nänyaù puruñasyätma-vibhramaù
mitrodäséna-ripavaù saàsäras tamasaù kåtaù
Nothing besides his own mental concoction makes the soul experience happiness and
distress. One’s perception of friends, neutral parties, and enemies, and the material life he
builds around this perception, are simply created out of ignorance.
COMMENTARY
The phrase ätma vibhrama is in the fifth dative case, but here it has been used as
first dative case. From illusion, all varieties of material manifestations emanate. Indeed,
from ignorance, material existence has come into being.
PURPORT
“I am the enjoyer and I am the master.” Such pride is typical of the conditioned souls,
who are absorbed in the bodily conception of life, wherein the false ego dictates, “I am
the material body, and everything in relation to the body is mine.” Seeing everything in
terms of such duality, those who are engrossed in the bodily concept of life are forgetful of
their constitutional position as eternal servants of the Supreme Lord. Somehow or other,
if one receives the mercy of the spiritual master and the Supreme Lord, the influence of
the lower modes of nature can be vanquished to nil so that one see things in the light of
pure knowledge. When one is rightly established in the devotional service of the Lord,
the desires for perfection in religiosity, economic development, sense gratification, and
liberation are uprooted from within the heart.
tasmät sarvätmanä täta nigåhäëa mano dhiyä
mayy äveçitayä yukta etävän yoga-saìgrahaù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
582 Chapter 17
My dear Uddhava, fixing your intelligence in Me, you should completely control your
mind, because this is the essence of yoga.
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Lord concludes His instructions by saying that control of the mind is
the essence of yoga.
PURPORT
Devotional service alone is capable of controlling the mind. All yoga systems, such
as karma-yoga, jïäna-yoga, haöha-yoga, räj- yoga, as well as other godless yogas, simply
disturb the mind. If one is bound by a particular religious system that preaches one of
the previously mentioned misconceptions, he will certainly remain a non-devotee.
ya etäà bhikñuëä gétäà brahma-niñöhäà samähitaù
dhärayaï chrävayaï chåëvan dvandvair naiväbhibhüyate
Anyone  who,  with  undivided  attention,  hears  or  chants  this  song  of  the  Avanté
brähmaëa,  which  contains  authorized  knowledge  of  the  Absolute  Truth,  will  soon
transcend the dualities of material happiness and distress.
COMMENTARY
Even if one is unable to regulate his mind, he can achieve the same result simply by
hearing the song of the Avanté brähmaëa.
PURPORT
A  tridaëòi  sanyäsé  who  has  taken  shelter  of  the  devotional  service  of  the  Lord
knows that such devotion is the only process for attaining life’s ultimate goal and thus
he is no longer bewildered by the illusory energy of his worshipable Lord. He engages
his time in hearing and chanting the glories of the Lord and he inspires others to follow
in his footsteps. Such a devotee is truly merciful because he leads others to the path of
devotional service without expecting anything in return. Those who are mere imitators
accept a person who is fond of the four objectives of life as their spiritual master and
thus  insure  that  they  remain  firmly  situated  in  ignorance.  Those  who  do  not  take
shelter of devotional service must be placed in two categories— sense enjoyers and dry
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Song of the AvantéBrähmaëa
renunciates. Those who accept as a leader one who is a sense enjoyer or a dry renunciate
will certainly remain averse to the devotional service of the Lord, who is advaya-jïäna
Vrajendranandana.
Thus end the translation of the seventeenth chapter of the Uddhava-géta entitled “The
Song  of  the  Avanté  Brähmaëa”  with  the  commentaries  of  Çréla  Viçvanätha  Cakravarté
Öhäkura  and  chapter  summary  and  purports  by  Çréla  Bhaktisiddhänta  Sarasvaté
Öhäkura.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 18
the PhILosoPhy of säìKhya
CHAPTER SUMMARY
This chapter contains further instructions by the Lord dealing with Säìkhya, the
analytical study of the elements of material nature. By the cultivation of knowledge, one
can rise above the dualities of material existence so that the bewilderment of the mind
can be dispelled.
Before the creation of the universe, the seer and the seen are unmanifest, being in a
dormant state. The Supreme Lord then unfolds the creation of the universe, so that the
conditioned souls are reawakened to activity. For creation, the three modes of material
nature are agitated by the glance of the Lord, which manifests the mahat-tattva. When
the  consciousness  of  the  conditioned  souls  is  awakened,  the  false  ego  is  generated  in
conjunction with the three modes of nature. False ego in the mode of ignorance creates
fifteen subtle forms of sense perception, and then the fifteen physical elements. False ego
in the mode of passion generates the ten senses, and false ego in the mode of goodness
causes the manifestation of the mind and the eleven demigods that are the controlling
deities of the senses. When all of these are amalgamated, the universal egg comes into
existence.  All  these  are  enacted  due  to  the  presence  of  the  Supersoul,  who  pervades
the  creation.  Then,  from  the  navel  of  the  Supreme  Lord  sprouts  a  lotus,  upon  which
Brahmä is born. Lord Brahmä then executes severe austerities under the direction of the
Supreme Lord, and by the power invested in him as a result of his penance, Brahmä then
recreates the universe as it was before. Within the universe are various planetary systems.
The  heavenly  planets  are  the  abodes  of  the  demigods,  the  space  between  heaven  and
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
586 Chapter 18
earth is the residence of ghosts and spirits, and the earth is the place for human beings
and lower species of life. Above these are the planets of the great sages, and the lower
regions of the universe are the residences of the demons and Nägas. Whatever activities
are performed under the direction of the three modes of material nature will carry one
to  these  places  of  residence  within  the  universe.  Those  who  perform  yoga  and  other
types of austerity, such as accepting the renounced order of life, can reach the highest
planets—Mahar, Janas, Tapas, and Satya. Devotional service is transcendental to the
modes of material nature and thus the goal of the devotees is not a material planet. The
destination of the devotees is the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
the spiritual sky. This universe is the place of fruitive activities and their reactions and
is manifest under the control of time and the three modes of material nature. Whatever
is seen to exist in this world is simply a product of these modes, which work under the
direction of the Supreme Lord. The creation of the universe is enacted from subtle to
gross, and the annihilation is enacted from gross to subtle. When all is dissolved, only
the  Supreme  Lord  remains  situated  in  his  transcendental  position  of  self-satisfaction.
When  one  cultivates  this  understanding  of  the  Supreme  Lord  and  His  creation,  the
mind will rise above the dualities of material existence. This understanding is known
as Säìkhya.
çré-bhagavän uväca
atha te sampravakñyämi säìkhyaà pürvair viniçcitam
yad vijïäya pumän sadyo jahyäd vaikalpikaà bhramam
Lord Çré Kåñëa said: My dear Uddhava, I shall now describe to you the philosophy
of Säìkhya, which was propounded by authorities, such as Kapila, in ancient times. By
understanding  this  philosophy,  one  can  immediately  gives  up  all  desires  for  material
happiness, which ultimately result in distress and which are born of duality.
COMMENTARY
This chapter describes the creation and annihilation of the cosmic manifestation.
Such creation and dissolution is the subject matter of Säìkhya philosophy.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Philosophy of Säì khya
It has been established from the bhékñu-gétä in the previous chapter that the cause
of the living entities’ happiness and distress is the accepting the subtle body, of which
the mind is the principal component, as the self. This is the sum and substance of the
material concept of life. This misunderstanding can be eliminated when the difference
between matter and spirit is clearly understood. The analytical study of material nature
and  the  difference  between  matter  and  spirit  are  the  subject  matters  of  the  Säìkhya
system of philosophy.
PURPORT
Those who adore the advancement of materialistic knowledge are generally averse
to the service of the Supreme Lord, who is fully transcendental. Those who are satisfied
to  confine  themselves  to  the  material  concept  of  life  cannot  understand  the  value  of
service to the transcendental Personality of Godhead. The Säìkhya philosophy that is
presented in this chapter is the one that was propounded by Lord Kapila in the Third
Canto of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam and not the atheistic Säìkhya taught by the imposter
Kapila.  The  material  elements  are  generated,  one  from  another,  from  subtle  to  gross.
One  should  not  imagine  that  such  a  creation  takes  place  automatically,  without  the
superintendence  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  Such  a  conception  of  evolution  can  only  be
accepted by those who are in the densest darkness of ignorance, and is never entertained
by the devotees of the Lord.
äséj jïänam atho artha ekam evävikalpitam
yadä viveka-nipuëä ädau kåta-yuge ‘yuge
During the Kåta-yuga, when men were very expert in spiritual understanding, and
also  previous  to  that,  during  the  period  of  annihilation,  the  seer  existed  alone,  non-
different from that which is seen.
COMMENTARY
Real  knowledge  entails  understanding  of  Brahman,  Paramätmä,  and  Bhagavän.
This is confirmed by Suta Gosvämé  in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam (1.2.11):
vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvaà yaj jïänam advayam
brahmeti paramätmeti bhagavän iti çabdyate
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
588 Chapter 18
Learned transcendentalists who know the Absolute Truth call this nondual
substance Brahman, Paramätmä, or Bhagavän.
The word atha means “complete.” The word avikalpitaà means “the one complete
knowledge,  or  Brahman,  who  has  no  substitute.”  In  Satya-yuga,  however,  people  are
viveka-nipuëäù, or expert in intelligent discrimination, and thus there is no difference
between their vision and reality. Seeing everything as the potency of the Supreme Lord,
they do not artificially create duality between themselves and other living entities.
PURPORT
The  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  is  the  Absolute  Truth,  who  dissipates  the
darkness of ignorance. The yuga in which satya, or truth, was fully manifest is called
Satya-yuga.  This  truth  was  instructed  by  the  Lord  to  the  heart  of  Brahmä.  At  that
time, non-dual spiritual knowledge was not obscured by the material propensity of the
mind to accept something and then later on reject it. In due course of time, however,
understanding of the non-dual truth gradually diminished.
tan mäyä-phala-rüpeëa kevalaà nirvikalpitam
väì-mano-’gocaraà satyaà dvidhä samabhavad båhat
Thereafter, the Supreme Absolute Truth, who is beyond the jurisdiction of the mind
and speech, who is one without a second, and who is completely transcendental, manifested
Himself in two features— the material nature, and the living entities who are trying to
enjoy the objects manifested by that nature.
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Brahman is one Absolute Truth. From Him manifested His external
energy, known as Maya, and His marginal energy, the infinitesimal spirit souls. These
two manifestations are non-different from the one Supreme Lord. The material nature
and the living entities are eternal energies of the Supreme Lord and they are beyond the
comprehension of the mind and speech.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Philosophy of Säì khya
PURPORT
The conditioned souls imagine themselves as enjoyers of the material nature because
they have no understanding of its connection with the Supreme Lord. Having given up
the shelter of the Supreme Lord while under this mundane conception, the conditioned
souls try to attain knowledge by mental speculation.
tayor ekataro hy arthaù prakåtiù sobhayätmikä
jïänaà tv anyatamo bhävaù puruñaù so ‘bhidhéyate
Of the two manifestations, one is the material nature, which embodies both the subtle
causes and the products of matter, and the other is the living entity, who considers himself
an enjoyer.
COMMENTARY
Among  the  two  energies  under  consideration,  one  is  the  material  nature  and  the
other is the living entity. Maya is the form of cause and effect, and the living entity is
the form of knowledge.
PURPORT
In  the  material  creation,  the  knower  of  matter,  the  object  of  knowledge,  and
knowledge have appeared in three forms. The soul is the knower, or seer, who considers
himself to be the enjoyer of the object of knowledge. Unadulterated devotional service
is the constitutional duty of the spirit soul. When one gives up that service, he becomes
a servant of ignorance by attempting to become the master of all he surveys.
tamo rajaù sattvam iti prakåter abhavan guëäù
mayä prakñobhyamäëäyäù puruñänumatena ca
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
590 Chapter 18
When  I  glance  over  the  material  nature  in  My  form  as  the  puruña  incarnation,  it
becomes agitated so that the three material modes— goodness, passion, and ignorance—
became manifested to fulfill the desires of the conditioned souls.
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Lord agitates material nature through His plenary portion, the puruña
incarnation. The creation is necessary to award an opportunity to the conditioned souls
to cultivate karma, jïäna, or bhakti, according to their desires at the time of the previous
annihilation. The living entities’ fate, or destiny, necessitates the material creation.
PURPORT
After being agitated by the glance of the Lord, the three modes of material nature
compete  with  each  other  for  the  control  of  the  conditioned  souls,  so  that  creation,
maintenance,  and  annihilation  are  also  always  at  odds  with  one  another.  The  three
modes of material nature are the causes of creation, maintenance, and annihilation.
tebhyaù samabhavat sutra mahän sütreëa saàyutaù
tato vikurvato jäto yo ‘haìkäro vimohanaù
From these modes, the first transformation that takes place is the mahat-tattva. The
transformation of the mahat-tattva then generated the false ego, which is the cause of the
living entities’ bewilderment.
COMMENTARY
The first transformation of the modes of nature is the power of action in a subtle
form. This first transformation is known as mahat-tattva. Mahat-tattva is invested with
activity and knowledge, for the sake of the bewildered conditioned souls.
PURPORT
The  mahat-tattva  came  into  existence  from  the  three  modes  of  material  nature,
and  later  on,  the  false  ego  manifested  from  the  mahat-tattva.  The  false  ego  dictates
material enjoyment or dry renunciation by covering the living entities with desires for
karma and jïäna. As one’s devotional service to the Lord slackens, these two tendencies
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Philosophy of Säì khya
automatically develop, just as the diminishing of light automatically brings an increase
in darkness.
vaikärikas taijasaç ca tämasaç cety ahaà tri-våt
tan-mätrendriya-manasäà käraëaà cid-acin-mayaù
False ego, which encompasses both matter and spirit, manifests in three categories—
vaikärika,  taijasa,  and  tämasa—arising  from  the  modes  of  goodness,  passion,  and
ignorance.  The  five  sense  objects,  the  senses,  and  the  mind  are  creations  of  the  false
ego.
COMMENTARY
False ego manifests the sense objects, the mind, and the connection of the eternal
spirit  soul  with  the  temporary  material  body.  Although  false  ego  is  itself  a  product  of
matter, it remains with the spirit soul as his designation. Thus, the tight knot that binds
the spirit soul to material existence is effected by the false ego.
PURPORT
The  three  categories  of  false  ego  are  sattvika  or  vaikärika,  räjasa  or  taijasa,  and
tämasika  or  tämasa.  These  three  manifestations  of  false  ego  transform  into  the  five
sense objects, the five knowledge-acquiring senses, and the mind. The false ego forms
the junction between the eternal soul and the material body. Desiring to lord it over the
material energy of the Supreme Lord, the conditioned souls come under the control of
the three modes of material nature, which causes them to assume temporary identities
in the bodily concept of life.
arthas tan-mätrikäj jajïe tämasäd indriyäëi ca
taijasäd devatä äsann ekädaça ca vaikåtät
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
592 Chapter 18
From false ego in the mode of ignorance, tämasa, the five objects of perception and
the five gross elements were generated. From false ego in the mode of passion, räjasa, the
ten senses were generated, and from false ego in the mode of goodness, sätvika, arose the
eleven demigods who control the senses and the mind.
COMMENTARY
Sound,  the  sense  of  hearing,  and  ether  are  the  products  of  false  ego  in  the  mode
of  ignorance.  Then,  the  sense  of  touch  and  air  are  produced.  In  this  way,  all  of  the
elements  and  the  perception  of  them  are  produced  from  subtle  to  gross.  The  senses
are created from false ego in the mode of passion and from false ego in goodness come
eleven demigods, who are controllers of the mind and senses.
PURPORT
The five material elements were created from the tämasa false ego, the senses were
created from the räjasa false ego, and the demigods controlling the senses were created
from the sattvika false ego.
mayä saïcoditä bhäväù sarve saàhatya-käriëaù
Aëòam utpädayäm äsur mamäyatanam uttamam
According to My will, all the elements combine to form the universal egg, which then
becomes one of My transcendental abodes.
COMMENTARY
The word bhäväù refers to all the ingredients that manifest the material universe.
PURPORT
By the combination of the elements manifested from the three modes of material
nature, the universe was created.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Philosophy of Säì khya
tasminn ahaà samabhavam aëòe salila-saàsthitau
mama näbhyäm abhüt padmaà viçväkhyaà tatra cätma-bhüù
Thereafter, I appeared within the water of the universe, in the form of Näräyaëa, and
from My navel, a lotus flower called viçva sprouted, upon which Brahmä was born.
COMMENTARY
The  Supreme  Lord  said:  In  the  water  within  the  universe,  I  appeared  as
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu. Four-headed Brahmä was then born from the lotus, called viçva,
that grew from My navel.
PURPORT
Mahä-viñëu,  who  lies  on  the  Causal  Ocean,  first  created  the  universe  and  then
entered within it. The universe, which resembled an egg, was floating on the water of
the Causal Ocean. From the navel of Lord Garbhadakaçäyé Viñëu sprouted a lotus called
viçva on which Brahmä was born. This Brahmä is the original personality of the whole
community of enjoyers.
so ‘såjat tapasä yukto rajasä mad-anugrahät
lokän sa-pälän viçvätmä bhür bhuvaù svar iti tridhä
Lord Brahmä, the soul of the universe, being empowered with the mode of passion,
performed great austerities, by My mercy, and thus created the three planetary systems
called Bhür, Bhuvar and Svar, along with their presiding deities.
PURPORT
By the strength of the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Brahmä, who
was born from Lord Viñëu’s lotus-like navel, created Bhüloka, Bhuvarloka, Svargaloka,
Maharloka,  Janaloka,  Tapoloka,  and  Satyaloka,  as  well  as  the  seven  lower  planetary
systems, beginning from Atala. All of these planets exist within this universe.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
594 Chapter 18
devänäm oka äsét svar bhütänäà ca bhuvaù padam
martyädénäà ca bhür lokaù siddhänäà tritayät param
Svargaloka  was  created  for  the  residence  of  the  demigods,  Bhuvarloka  was  created
for  ghosts,  and  Bhüloka  was  created  as  the  residence  of  human  beings.  Beyond  these
three planetary systems, other planets, beginning from Maharloka, were created as the
residence of perfected beings who strive for liberation.
PURPORT
Demigods  reside  in  Svargaloka,  human  beings  reside  in  Bhüloka,  and  Bhuvaloka,
or the sky, is a temporary residence for both classes of beings. Four higher planets were
created to accommodate those who desire liberation from the material world.
adho ‘suräëäà nägänäà bhümer oko ‘såjat prabhuù
tri-lokyäà gatayaù sarväù karmaëäà tri-guëätmanäm
Lord  Brahmä  also  created  planets  below  the  earth,  beginning  from  Atala,  as  the
residence for demons and the Näga snakes. As a result of their fruitive activities performed
under the modes of material nature, living entities take birth within these three worlds.
PURPORT
Planets,  such  as  Atala,  were  created  for  the  Nägas,  or  serpents.  Acting  under  the
influence of the three modes of material nature, human beings are forced to suffer and
enjoy the fruits of their karma as they are transmigrate within the limit of these three
planetary systems.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Philosophy of Säì khya
yogasya tapasaç caiva nyäsasya gatayo ‘maläù
mahar janas tapaù satyaà bhakti-yogasya mad-gatiù
By practice of mystic yoga, undergoing great austerities, and accepting the renounced
order of life, the superior destinations of Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka, and Satyaloka
are attained. But, by executing devotional service unto Me, one attains My eternal abode,
Vaikuëöha.
COMMENTARY
Performance of pious activities, astäìga yoga, and renunciation lead one to planets
such as Maharloka. Pure devotees of the Lord attain the transcendental abode of Lord,
Vaikuëöha.
PURPORT
By  the  strength  of  their  austerity,  yoga,  and  renunciation,  living  entities  obtain
superior destinations like Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka, and Satyaloka. Attainment of
these planets is temporary because after the merit achieved by one’s practice is exhausted,
one must return to earth. On the other hand, by the influence of devotional service to
the Supreme Lord, one attains the eternal abode, Vaikuëöha.
mayä kälätmanä dhäträ karma-yuktam idaà jagat
guëa-praväha etasminn unmajjati nimajjati
The results of fruitive work are awarded within this world by Me, the supreme creator,
acting as time. Thus, one sometimes rises up toward the surface of this mighty river of the
modes of material nature, and sometimes again becomes submerged.
COMMENTARY
The  destination  awarded  by  one’s  fruitive  activities  that  are  performed  under  the
influence of the modes of nature is temporary. The Supreme Lord in His form as time
is the giver of the fruits of one’s actions. In this world, where all activities are carried
out  under  the  influence  of  the  three  modes  of  nature,  one  sometimes  rises  to  higher
destinations, such as Satyaloka, and sometimes is submerged in the lower destinations,
such as Pätälaloka.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
596 Chapter 18
PURPORT
Those  who  do  not  engage  in  the  devotional  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord  are
sometimes drowned in the river of the material modes of nature and sometimes brought
to its surface. The Supreme Lord, acting as providence, causes the living entities, who
suffer  and  enjoy  the  fruits  of  their  karma,  to  wander  about  throughout  the  fourteen
worlds.
aëur båhat kåçaù sthülo yo yo bhävaù prasidhyati
sarvo ‘py ubhaya-saàyuktaù prakåtyä puruñeëa ca
Whatever visibly exists within the material world—whether small or great, thin or
stout—certainly contains both the material nature and its enjoyer, the spirit soul.
COMMENTARY
This verse describes how the effect is present within the cause. The word bhäva in
this verse means “effect.”
PURPORT
Whatever  is  seen  to  exist  within  this  world,  whether  very  great  or  insignificant,
is a combination of the conditioned souls who are acting as enjoyers, and the material
nature which he is trying to enjoy.
yas tu yasyädir antaç ca sa vai madhyaà ca tasya san
vikäro vyavahärärtho yathä taijasa-pärthiväù
Gold  and  earth  originally  exist  as  ingredients.  From  gold  one  may  make  golden
bracelets and earrings, and from earth one may make clay pots and plates. The original
ingredients, gold and earth, exist before the products are made from them, and when the
products are eventually destroyed, the original ingredients, gold and earth, will remain.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Philosophy of Säì khya
Therefore, because the ingredients are present in the beginning and at the end, they must
also be present in the middle phase, taking the form of some object to which we give a
particular name, such as bracelet.
COMMENTARY
In this verse, the Lord explains that the original cause is present in its effect, giving
the  example  of  gold  and  clay  as  the  causal  ingredients  of  many  different  products.
We  assign  various  names  to  such  temporary  products,  although  their  essential  nature
continues  to  be  that  of  the  ingredient,  and  not  of  the  temporary  product,  such  as  a
bracelet or earring.
PURPORT
Under  the  influence  of  time,  an  element  as  a  cause  may  transforms  into  many
products or effects, just as gold is transformed when we manufacture gold earrings and
earth is transformed when we make clay pots. These transformations are temporary and
at the beginning, in the middle, or at the end, the essential characteristic of the cause
remains unchanged.
yad upädäya pürvas tu bhävo vikurute ‘param
ädir anto yadä yasya tat satyam abhidhéyate
A  material  object,  which  is  composed  of  an  essential  ingredient,  creates  another
material object as a transformation. Thus one created object becomes the cause and basis
of  another  created  object.  Any  particular  object  may  therefore  be  called  real  in  that  it
possesses the basic nature of another object that constitutes its origin, as well as its final
state.
COMMENTARY
Although cause and effect are both accepted as factual, the Vedas place more stress
on the cause than the effect. Earth and a clay pot must both be considered factual. For
example, a potter becomes the instrumental cause, taking some earth to manufacture
clay pots. Earth, as the cause, is real and the cause is clay pots. The primary cause of both
earth and the clay pots is material nature. Because the cause is present in the effect, they
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
598 Chapter 18
both must be real. This is called tat satyaà in the language of the Vedas. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead has declared Himself as the original cause of everything. There is
no opportunity for the impersonalists to give some other interpretation in this regard.
PURPORT
There is no objection to accepting all the objects of our perception as reality, but
their temporary transformable nature must be accounted for. Still, it is never reasonable
to call any materially created object as false. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the
original reality and by finding that material nature is a temporary manifestation, one
should not imagine Him or His actions to be false. Of course, the temporarily manifested
transformations  cannot be accepted as  the  ultimate reality, which is understood  from
the Vedas to be the eternal reality of Vaikuëöha.
prakåtir yasyopädänam ädhäraù puruñaù paraù
sato ‘bhivyaïjakaù kälo brahma tat tritayaà tv aham
Material nature, which is the original ingredient of the creation; the Supreme Lord,
who  is  the  shelter  of  the  material  nature;  and  time,  are  non-different  from  Me,  the
Absolute Truth.
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Lord is the cause of all causes. Mahä-Viñëu is His plenary portion, and
time represents the Lord’s activity. In this way, time and nature are always subservient
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who creates, maintains and annihilates all that
exists  through  the  agency  of  His  potencies  and  plenary  portions.  All  followers  of  the
Vedas accept that material nature is the ingredient cause of the cosmic manifestation,
and  that  the  Supreme  Lord  is  the  shelter  of  all  energies.  The  Lord  agitates  material
nature by glancing over her and then continues to superintend her activities in His form
as time. Thus, material nature always works under the direction of the Supreme Lord.
Although the cosmic creation is certainly a transformation of energy, the Supreme Lord
Himself is unchanging and supreme.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Philosophy of Säì khya
PURPORT
It  should  be  understood  that  the  instrumental  cause  invests  its  potency  into  the
ingredient cause, under the control of time, and thus they are non-different from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
sargaù pravartate tävat paurväparyeëa nityaçaù
mahän guëa-visargärthaù sthity-anto yävad ékñaëam
As long as the Supreme Personality of Godhead continues to glance upon material
nature, the universe will continue to exist, manifesting through procreation of the great
and variegated flow of universal creation, for the sake of the conditioned souls.
COMMENTARY
By the interactions of the three modes of material nature, various types of bodies
are  created,  and  by  procreation,  this  process  seems  to  go  on  perpetually.  In  order  to
maintain the conditioned souls, who have the spirit of material enjoyment, the creation
continues to exist for as long as the Lord glances over it.
PURPORT
Material nature and time cannot function independently, they are active only as long
as the Supreme Lord continues to glace over them. Time and the cosmic manifestation
are  created  just  to  give  the  conditioned  souls,  who  are  averse  to  the  Supreme  Lord,  a
field of activities.
viräë mayäsädyamäno loka-kalpa-vikalpakaù
païcatväya viçeñäya kalpate bhuvanaiù saha
I manifest the universal form, which displays endless variety through repeated creation,
maintenance, and destruction of the planetary systems. Originally containing everything
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
600 Chapter 18
within  itself,  My  universal  form  manifests  the  varieties  of  creation  by  arranging  the
coordinated combination of the five gross elements.
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Lord, in His form as time, pervades the entire universe. After creating
all  planets  and  living  entities  through  the  agency  of  the  material  nature,  He  finally
withdraws the entire creation. The word païcatva in this verse means “death.”
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord, in His form as time, repeatedly creates, maintains, and annihilates
the universe.
anne praléyate martyam annaà dhänäsu léyate
dhänä bhümau praléyante bhümir gandhe praléyate
apsu praléyate gandha äpaç ca sva-guëe rase
léyate jyotiñi raso jyoté rüpe praléyate
rüpaà väyau sa ca sparçe léyate so ‘pi cämbare
ambaraà çabda-tan-mätra indriyäëi sva-yoniñu
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Philosophy of Säì khya
yonir vaikärike saumya léyate manaséçvare
çabdo bhütädim apyeti bhütädir mahati prabhuù
sa léyate mahän sveñu guëesu guëa-vattamaù
te ‘vyakte sampraléyante tat käle léyate ‘vyaye
kälo mäyä-maye jéve jéva ätmani mayy aje
ätmä kevala ätma-stho vikalpäpäya-lakñaëaù
At the time of annihilation, the bodies of the conditioned souls merge into food, food
merges into grain, and grains merge into the earth. The earth merges into its quality of
fragrance, fragrance merges into water, and water merges into its quality of taste. Taste
merges into fire and fire merges into its quality of form, which then merges into the sky.
Sky then merges into its quality of sound. The senses of the living beings merge into their
predominating deities, and these demigods merges into mind. Mind merges into false ego
in goodness, and sound merges into false ego in the mode of ignorance. Finally, false ego
merges into the total material substance, which then merges with the modes of nature.
The modes of nature then merge with the unmanifest nature and the unmanifest merges
into  time.  Time  then  merges  into  the  Supersoul,  who  provides  inspiration  to  all  living
beings.  Thus,  I  remain  alone  after  the  dissolution  of  the  universe,  self-satisfied  in  the
transcendental position.
COMMENTARY
In this regard, the Vedic evidence can be cited—tasmädvä etasmädätmana äkäçaù
sambhütaù  äkäçädväyuù  väyoragniù  agneräpaù  adbhyaù  påthivé  påthivyä  oñadhayaù
oñadhébhyo’nnam annätpuruñaù “From the Supreme Personality of Godhead, ether was
manifested.  From  ether,  air  was  manifested.  From  air,  fire  was  manifested.  From  fire,
water was manifested. From water, earth was manifested. From earth, medicinal herbs
were manifested. From herbs, grains were manifested, and the living entities subsist on
food grains.”
This is a description of the process of creation, and the process of annihilation is
a reversal of this. It is stated that just before the time of annihilation, there will be no
rainfall for one hundred years, and as a result, there will be no food grains. Because of
no  food  grains  upon  which  the  living  entities  subsist,  all  material  bodies  will  perish.
Thus there will be complete famine, and the grains, along with their seeds, will merge
into earth, and earth will merge into smell. In this way, the process of annihilation will
continue. The earth will be dried up by samvartaka and then burnt by fire emanating
from the mouth of Lord Saìkarñaëa. After that, there will only be the subtle qualities of
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
602 Chapter 18
the elements, and nothing else. The senses will merge into their own cause, the taijasa
false ego, the taijasa false ego will merge into the vaikärika false ego, the vaikärika false
ego  will  merge  into  the  mind,  and  the  mind  will  merge  into  the  supreme  controller.
The mind is the controller of the working senses and knowledge-acquiring senses. The
sky  will  merge  into  the  sense  objects,  the  sense  objects  will  merge  into  tämasa  false
ego, the three false egos will merge into the mahat-tattva, the mahat-tattva will merge
into material modes of nature, and the three modes of material nature will merge into
the  non-manifested  material  nature,  pradhäna.  The  neutral  state  of  existence  of  the
three  modes  of  material  nature  is  called  dissolution.  In  this  state  of  neutrality,  the
non-manifested material nature will merge into time. Still, it is impossible to perfectly
describe  the  dissolution  of  the  material  nature.  It  has  therefore  been  stated  in  the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam 12.4.19, as follows:
na tasya kälävayavaiù pariëämädayo guëäù
anädy anantam avyaktaà nityaà käraëam avyayam
The  unmanifest  material  nature  is  not  subjected  to  the  six  kinds  of
transformation caused by the influence of time. Rather, it has no beginning and
no  end.  It  is  the  eternal  and  infallible  cause  of  creation.  (Çrémad-Bhägavatam
12.4.19)
Material nature has existed since time immemorial. In the story of Jayanta, when
Antarikña  described  the  annihilation,  there  is  no  mention  of  the  material  nature’s
annihilation. Therefore it is said in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam 12.4.22:
layaù präkåtiko hy eña puruñävyaktayor yadä
çaktayaù sampraléyante vivaçäù käla-vidrutäù
This  is  the  annihilation  called  präkåtika,  during  which  the  energies  of  the
Supreme Lord and His unmanifest material nature, disassembled by the force of
time, are deprived of their potencies and merge into Him.
Material  nature,  along  with  her  three  modes,  is  dissolved,  so  that  her  power  of
creation is withdrawn. The living entities actually are not subject to annihilation. They
are eternal and inexhaustible, belonging to the Lord’s superior energy known as taöastha
çakti. There is no question of the living entities losing their real identity and spiritual
form. After annihilation of the universe, the living entities merge into the existence of
the Supersoul. Although they merge, they do not lose their individuality.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Philosophy of Säì khya
PURPORT
After  the  temporary  material  manifestations  are  merged  into  their  respective
causes, those conditioned souls who have qualified for their liberated state of existence
achieve an inclination toward the Lord’s service. The segmented manifestation of time
then places the liberated souls on the platform of eternal service within the realm of
undivided  time.  Until  the  conditioned  souls  achieve  shelter  at  the  lotus  feet  of  the
Supreme Lord, they continue to remain under the control of the material nature. The
influence  of  segmented  time  creates  various  kinds  of  inauspiciousness  for  the  living
entities.  The  conditioned  souls  struggle  for  existence  under  the  control  of  the  three
modes of material nature. Being conditioned by the modes of nature, they swing like a
pendulum, alternating between a state of material enjoyment and one of renunciation.
As long as there is no resolute determination to engage in the devotional service of the
Supreme Lord, such an incompatible state of being will continue to exist.
evam anvékñamäëasya kathaà vaikalpiko bhramaù
manaso hådi tiñöheta vyomnévärkodaye tamaù
When the sun rises, darkness is dispelled. Similarly, when factual understanding of
the universal dissolution is realized, the illusory conceptions of duality cannot remain in
the mind of the serious transcendentalist. Even if such illusion enters his mind, it will
not remain.
COMMENTARY
Due  to  illusion,  one  considers  the  material  body  to  be  the  self.  But,  by  carefully
analyzing the difference between matter and spirit by studying the Säìkhya philosophy,
such illusion will vanquish, and one will come to realize that he is a pure spirit soul.
PURPORT
Just  as  the  rising  of  the  sun  dispels  darkness,  an  understanding  of  Lord  Kåñëa’s
teachings  to  Uddhava  dissipates  one’s  ignorance.  One  who  realizes  the  truth  of  these
instructions  will  be  relieved  of  the  bodily  conception  of  life.  Even  if  some  residual
material attachment sometimes crops up, it will not remain due to the strength of one’s
spiritual realization.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 18
uddhava-gétä
eña säìkhya-vidhiù proktaù saàçaya-granthi-bhedanaù
pratilomänulomäbhyäà parävara-dåça mayä
Thus I, the original seer of everything material and spiritual, have imparted to you
this knowledge of Säìkhya, which destroys the illusion of doubt by a scientific analysis of
creation and annihilation.
PURPORT
The  material  mind  accepts  and  rejects  many  different  understandings  of  reality,
generating  innumerable  false  arguments  about  the  actual  process  of  perfection.  But,
those who have taken shelter at the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord can see everything in
their right perspective. By directly and indirectly discussing these topics of the Supreme
Lord and His energy, the conditioned souls can be liberated from material bondage and
attain eternal service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Thus end the translation of the eighteenth chapter of the Uddhava-géta entitled “The
Philosophy of Säìkhya” with the commentaries of Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura
and chapter summary and purports by Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 19
the three modes of nature and beyond
CHAPTER SUMMARY
In this chapter, the effects of the influence of the three modes of material nature—
goodness, passion, and ignorance—are described. Such knowledge ultimately culminates
in an understanding of the transcendental nature of the Supreme Lord.
Godly qualities, such as tolerance and self control are manifestations of the mode
of goodness. Material desires, feverish endeavor, and false pride are indications of the
predominance of the mode of passion. Foolishness, uncontrolled anger, and insatiable
greed are characteristics of the mode of ignorance. Every conditioned soul is influenced
by a mixture of these thee modes, and according to one’s situation under the modes of
nature, the false ego of “I” and “mine” take on various aspects in terms of one’s behavior,
personality, concept of religion, and engagements in sense gratification.
A  person  primarily  influenced  by  the  mode  of  goodness  certainly  worships  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead as a matter of duty, without consideration of personal
profit.  One  who  worships  the  Supreme  Lord  in  the  hopes  of  some  kind  of  material
improvement  is  primarily  influenced  by  the  mode  of  passion.  Crime  and  violence  are
exhibited by those who have sunk deeply into the influence of the mode of ignorance.
Although these modes of nature direct the thoughts and activities of all the conditioned
souls, they have no effect upon the Supreme Lord, who remains fixed in His transcendental
position.
Whatever  is  experience  in  this  world—the  time,  place,  circumstances,  results
of  karma,  objects,  activities,  performers  of  activities,  one’s  faith,  development  of
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
606 Chapter 19
consciousness,  the  destination  after  death,  and  so  on—are  permeated  by  the  three
modes of material nature. However, everything in relation to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead—everything employed in His service, places of His pastimes, activities offered
for  His  satisfaction,  the  performer  of  devotional  service,  time  spent  in  His  devotional
service, and so on—is transcendental to the three modes of material nature.
The energy of the Lord is manifested in an unlimited variety of conditions of life
for  the  living  entities  who  are  rotating  within  the  cycle  of  birth  and  death.  All  such
conditions of life are manifestations of the three modes of material nature, and they are
the  results  of  the  conditioned  souls’  fruitive  activities.  One  can  free  himself  from  the
influence of the three modes of material nature by engaging in the devotional service
of  the  Supreme  Lord.  Human  life  is  the  opportunity  for  cultivating  knowledge  of  the
Absolute Truth and any sane man will surely avail himself of this rarely obtained facility.
By a careful cultivation of the mode of goodness, one can overcome the influence of the
lower  modes  of  passion  and  ignorance.  Thereafter,  one  can  advance  even  further  by
rising above the mode of goodness to the transcendental platform of devotional service.
When one is fixed in the devotional service of the Lord, his ultimate destination is the
association  of  the  Supreme  Lord  in  the  spiritual  sky,  which  is  attained  when,  by  His
grace, the gross and subtle coverings are dissolved at the time of death.
çré-bhagavän uväca
guëänäm asammiçräëäà pumän yena yathä bhavet
tan me puruña-varyedam upadhäraya çaàsataù
The Supreme Lord said: O foremost of men, please listen attentively as I describe how
the conditioned soul is awarded his particular nature due to the association of the three
modes of material nature.
COMMENTARY
This chapter describes the different natures produced by the three material modes
of nature, and how these modes manifest varieties within this world. Also described is
the liberated soul and the Supreme Lord, who are transcendental to the three modes of
material nature.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Three Modes of Nature and Beyond
Unless  one  rises  above  the  influence  of  the  three  modes  of  material  nature,  one
cannot give up the bodily concept of life. The analytical study of matter and spirit that
is elaborated in the Säìkhya philosophy helps one rise above the influence of the modes
of nature. Here, the Lord gives a more elaborate description of the characteristics of the
three modes of material nature. He says: “O foremost among men, the three modes of
material nature are sometimes seen in their pure condition and sometimes when they
are  mixed.”  The  Supreme  Lord  will  explain  in  this  chapter  how  a  person  develops  a
particular personality according to the different manifestations of the material modes.
PURPORT
By  cultivating  spiritual  advancement,  the  living  entities  can  achieve  two  kinds  of
knowledge—that which is received in disciplic succession and that which only gradually
removes ignorance. In this manifest world, we find three things in our daily experience—
the speaker, the topic, and the listener. This is the nature of the world governed by the
three material modes. When the transcendental spiritual objective dominates the mind
of the speaker, his talks will not contain any abomination born of the three modes of
material  nature.  Indeed,  his  purpose  of  talking  is  to  expose  the  abomination  that  is
born of the material modes. If the conditioned souls of this world simply hear topics of
Vaikuëöha,  they  will  gain  relief  from  their  anarthas,  which  have  become  temporarily
manifested as a result of their material concept of life. All activities performed in this
world  under  the  control  of  the  three  modes  of  material  nature  are  temporary,  devoid
of true knowledge, and full of misery. There is no possibility for materially conditioned
people to obtain the eternal nature, which is full of knowledge and bliss, by hearing the
talks of imperfect philosophers.
In this chapter, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the speaker. Because He is
fully  transcendental  to  the  material  modes  of  nature  and  because  He  is  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead, He can establish the proper procedure for hearing and chanting.
Because non-devotees do not hear the topics of Lord Hari from the Lord Himself, due
to  being  averse  to  His  devotional  service,  they  remain  covered  by  the  Lord’s  illusory
potency. Being bereft of oral reception in disciplic succession, they remain ignorant of
the science of the self and the science of God.
TEXTS 2-5
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
608 Chapter 19
çamo damas titikñekñä tapaù satyaà dayä småtiù
tuñöis tyägo ‘spåhä çraddhä hrér dayädiù sva-nirvåtiù
käma éhä madas tåñëä stambha äçér bhidä sukham
madotsäho yaçaù-prétir häsyaà véryaà balodyamaù
krodho lobho ‘nåtaà hiàsä yäcïä dambhaù klamaù kaliù
çoka-mohau viñädärté  nidräçä bhér anudyamaù
sattvasya rajasaç caitäs tamasaç cänupürvaçaù
våttayo varëita-präyäù sannipätam atho çåëu
Peacefulness,  self-control,  tolerance,  the  power  of  discrimination,  remaining  fixed
in  one’s  occupational  duties,  truthfulness,  compassion,  careful  study  of  the  influence
of  time,  satisfaction,  renunciation,  detachment  from  sense  gratification,  faith,  modesty,
giving charity, and self-satisfaction are the qualities of the mode of goodness. Lust, great
endeavor,  pride,  thirst  for  material  enjoyment,  false  ego,  praying  to  the  demigods  for
material wealth, discrimination between oneself and others, sense gratification, eagerness
to fight, considering oneself to be supreme, fondness for flattery, the ridiculing of others,
boasting of one’s prowess, and justifying one’s actions by dint of one’s strength, are the
qualities  of  the  mode  of  passion.  Anger,  greed,  falsehood,  violence,  envy,  hypocrisy,
chronic fatigue, quarrel, lamentation, illusion, moroseness, poverty, fear, and laziness, are
the qualities of the mode of ignorance. Now hear about the combination of these three
modes.
COMMENTARY
The characteristics of the mode of goodness are peacefulness, self control, ikñä, which
means the power of discrimination, tolerance, detachment, compassion, righteousness,
submission,  and  satisfaction  within  one’s  own  self.  The  characteristics  of  the  mode  of
passion  are  lust,  éhä,  which  means  great  exertion,  stambha,  which  means  false  pride,
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Three Modes of Nature and Beyond
äçé, which means to pray to the demigods for wealth, material enjoyment, mada, which
means  enthusiasm  for  fighting,  flattery,  desire  for  fame  and  adoration,  boasting,  and
considering oneself to be the greatest. The characteristics of the mode of ignorance are
anger, hypocrisy, moroseness, and indolence.
PURPORT
Because there is no accepting and rejecting based on the bodily concept of life in
the pure mode of goodness, the mind can be easily controlled. To remain undisturbed in
the face of the dualities of material existence, such as heat and cold, and happiness and
distress, is called tolerance. The best use of the power of discrimination is to cultivate
knowledge  of  the  spiritual  nature,  which  is  eternal,  full  of  knowledge,  and  blissful.
Austerity  means  to  accept  even  painful  conditions  that  are  favorable  for  spiritual
advancement. Truthfulness refers speaking frankly about the nature of reality without
distorting  the  facts  to  please  others.  To  instruct  others  about  the  purpose  of  human
life  is  the  best  expression  of  compassion.  To  give  up  activities  of  sense  gratification
by  employing  everything  in  the  service  of  the  Lord  is  real  renunciation.  To  give  up
hankering for the possession of temporary sense objects is called detachment. To act on
the order of the scriptures, and not whimsically, is termed righteousness. To patiently
hear the topics of Lord Hari is called faith. To feel shame in the presence of abominable
activities is termed modesty. When one engages in hearing discussions of the glories of
the Lord without duplicity, for attaining self-realization and self-satisfaction in this life,
this is certainly an activity that is characteristic of the mode of goodness. Those who are
influenced by the mode of passion have a great desire to enjoy the objects of the senses,
and they are very ambitious, intoxicated by pride, never satisfied, always eager to amass
more and more wealth and possessions, very egoistic, fond of worshiping the demigods
for material improvement, envious of others’ success, fond of being flattered and fond
of ridiculing others, thinking themselves to be the greatest. Anger due to intolerance,
miserliness,  falsehood  and  speech  devoid  of  scriptural  evidence,  inclination  toward
violence, desiring without deserving, hypocrisy, fondness for quarrel, lamentation over
previous foolishness, illusion, moroseness, laziness, dependence, selfishness, fearfulness,
and lack of enthusiasm are the symptoms of people who are in the mode of ignorance.
sannipätas tv aham iti mamety uddhava yä matiù
vyavahäraù sannipäto mano-mätrendriyäsubhiù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
610 Chapter 19
My dear Uddhava, all the combinations of the modes of nature manifest the mentality
of “I” and “mine,” which is present in all conditioned souls. The ordinary transactions
of this world, which are impelled by the mind, the objects of perception, the senses, and
the vital within the body, are also derived from the combination of the modes of material
nature.
COMMENTARY
The  conceptions  of  “I”  and  “mine”  are  transitory  and  subject  to  transformation.
All kinds of ordinary dealings impelled by the mind having such a conception are also
illusory.  The  sense  of  “I”  and  “mine”  is  applicable  to  the  conditioned  souls,  and  has
nothing  to  do  with  the  pure  spirit  soul.  One  who  is  very  peaceful  is  not  expected  to
become blinded by lust or anger, nor would he be found to be falsely proud.
PURPORT
“I am the material body, which is a product of matter, and everything in relation to
the body is mine.” Such an illusory concept occurs by the mixture of the three modes of
material nature. It should also be understood that material objects that the mind accepts
with the help of the senses are a result of the mixture of the modes of nature.
dharme cärthe ca käme ca yadäsau pariniñöhitaù
guëänäà sannikarño ‘yaà çraddhä-rati-dhanävahaù
When  a  person  devotes  himself  to  religiosity,  economic  development,  and  sense
gratification, the faith, sensual enjoyment, and wealth that is obtained are the results of
the interactions of the three modes of nature.
COMMENTARY
Religiosity,  economic  development,  and  sense  gratification  are  engagements
impelled  by  the  modes  of  nature,  and  the  faith,  wealth,  and  enjoyment  obtained  by
them clearly reveal the situation of a person within the modes of nature. When one is
attached to religiosity, the quality of faith becomes predominant. When one is attached
to sense gratification, or lust, conjugal affairs becomes prominent, and one is attached
to economic development, desires for prosperity becomes prominent.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Three Modes of Nature and Beyond
PURPORT
Because of the interaction of the three modes of nature, those who desire advancement
in religiosity, economic development, and sense gratification, develop faith in religious
practices, attachment to wealth, and a great hankering impelled by lust.
pravåtti-lakñaëe niñöhä pumän yarhi gåhäçrame
sva-dharme cänu tiñöheta guëänäà samitir hi sä
When  one  has  a  strong  desire  for  sense  gratification,  he  enters  family  life  and
subsequently engages in occupational and religious duties. Such a condition is evidence of
the interaction of the three modes of material nature.
COMMENTARY
When a person has strong desires for sense gratification and thus enters family life,
he performs his occupational and religious duties with great enthusiasm.
PURPORT
The  principles  of  äçrama  dharma  arise  from  the  interaction  of  the  three  modes
of  material  nature.  That  is  why  Çré  Gaursundara,  while  discussing  the  constitutional
position of the living entities, declared varëäçrama-dharma to be external and therefore
irrelevant. Different natures of the conditioned souls are born from various combinations
of  the  modes  of  nature.  The  servants  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  instead  of  desiring  sense
enjoyment, display attachment for the beauty of the spiritual nature and the pastimes of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
puruñaà sattva-saàyuktam anuméyäc chamädibhiù
kämädibhé rajo-yuktaà krodhädyais tamasä yutam
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
612 Chapter 19
One who exhibits qualities such as self-control is understood to be predominantly in
the mode of goodness. Similarly, a passionate person is recognized by his lust, and one in
ignorance is recognized by qualities such as anger.
COMMENTARY
In  this  verse,  the  Lord  describes  the  characteristics  of  those  who  are  under  the
influence of the various modes of material nature.
PURPORT
Qualities such as self-control that were described in the second verse of this chapter
belong to a person who is situated in the mode of goodness. Qualities such as lust that
were described in the third verse belong to a person situated who is situated in the mode
of  passion,  and  the  qualities  described  in  the  fourth  verse  belong  to  a  person  who  is
situated in the mode of ignorance.
yadä bhajati mäà bhaktyä nirapekñaù sva-karmabhiù
taà sattva-prakåtià vidyät puruñaà striyam eva vä
Any  man  or  woman  who  worships  Me  with  devotion,  offering  the  results  of  his
activities unto Me without attachment is to be known as in the mode of goodness.
COMMENTARY
When a person is situated in a particular mode of nature and renders service to the
Supreme Lord, his service is saturated with that particular mode. This is being explained
in these two verses.
PURPORT
Those who are in the mode of goodness, whether male or female, become inspired to
worship the Supreme Lord by offering the results of their occupational duties.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Three Modes of Nature and Beyond
yadä äçiña äçäsya mäà bhajeta sva-karmabhiù
taà rajaù-prakåtià vidyät hiàsäm äçäsya tämasam
When a person serves Me with a desire to achieve sense gratification, he should be
understood to be in the mode of passion, and when he worships Me with a desire to harm
others, he should be understood to be in the mode of ignorance.
COMMENTARY
The word hiàsä means “destroying one’s enemies.”
PURPORT
Materialistic  people  hope  to  achieve  some  temporary  benefit  as  a  result  of  their
actions.  One  should  know  that  worship  of  the  Supreme  Lord  with  such  a  desire  is  to
be  considered  in  the  mode  of  passion,  and  activities  performed  with  an  intention  of
harming  others  are  understood  to  be  impelled  by  the  mode  of  ignorance.  Desire  for
wealth, followers, and fame is in the mode of passion, and the desire for achieving victory
over others by means of violence is in the mode of ignorance.
sattvaà rajas tama iti guëä jévasya naiva me
citta-jä yais tu bhütänäà sajjamäno nibadhyate
The three modes of material nature—goodness, passion, and ignorance—influence
the  conditioned  souls  but  not  Me.  Manifesting  within  the  mind,  the  modes  of  nature
induce the living entity to become attached to their material bodies and the objects of the
senses, causing him to be bound to material nature.
COMMENTARY
The three modes of material nature bind the living entities but not the Supreme Lord.
The material modes act within the mind of the living entities, manifesting themselves
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
614 Chapter 19
as  material  designations.  By  the  influence  of  the  modes  of  nature,  the  living  entities
become conditioned, thinking the material body to be the self and material objects as
meant for their enjoyment. However, the Supreme Lord is never conditioned by nature’s
modes because the material nature works under His direction. Although He is the origin
of the cosmic manifestation, He eternally remains in His transcendental position.
PURPORT
The speaker of this chapter, as the supreme instructor, while describing the living
entities’ entanglement in material nature, revealed to Uddhava that He Himself is never
overwhelmed by the combination of nature’s three modes.
yadetarau jayet sattvaà bhäsvaraà viçadaà çivam
tadä sukhena yujyeta dharma-jïänädibhiù pumän
When  the  pure,  illuminating,  and  auspicious  mode  of  goodness  predominates  over
passion and ignorance, one become endowed with happiness, knowledge, piety, and other
good qualities.
COMMENTARY
Conditioned souls and the three modes of material nature are forced and the imposers
of force, respectively. How the living entities become conditioned is being explained in
these  three  verses.  When  the  mode  of  goodness  conquers  the  modes  of  passion  and
ignorance, one becomes bright, pure, peaceful, auspicious, noble, pious, and wise. These
qualities are the source of happiness for a person in the mode of goodness.
PURPORT
In the material conception of life, male and female are considered the enjoyer and
the enjoyed. When a person is able to minimize the influence of the modes of passion
and  ignorance  by  cultivation  of  the  mode  of  goodness,  qualities  such  as  peacefulness,
give him a sense of satisfaction.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Three Modes of Nature and Beyond
yadä jayet tamaù sattvaà rajaù saìgaà bhidä calam
tadä duùkhena yujyeta karmaëä yaçasä çriyä
When  the  mode  of  passion,  which  causes  attachment,  separatism,  and  activity,
overwhelms  the  mode  of  ignorance  and  goodness,  a  man  works  hard  to  acquire  wealth
and fame. Thus, in the mode of passion, he struggles hard and experiences anxiety.
COMMENTARY
When, by acting in the mode of passion, the modes of ignorance and goodness are
subdued,  one  suffers  various  forms  of  distress.  It  is  stated  in  the  Vedic  literature  that
one experiences fear due to absorption in matter. Under the influence of the mode of
passion, one performs fruitive activities to achieve wealth and fame.
PURPORT
When the mode of passion becomes prominent, subduing the influence of the modes
of  ignorance  and  goodness,  one  desires  to  become  famous  by  lording  it  over  material
nature, but this ultimately brings him great unhappiness.
yadä jayed rajaù sattvaà tamo müòhaà layaà jaòam
yujyeta çoka-mohäbhyäà nidrayä hiàsayäçayä
When the mode of ignorance defeats the modes of goodness and passion, it covers a
person’s consciousness so that he is deprived of all sense of discrimination. Falling into
lamentation and illusion, a person in the mode of ignorance sleeps excessively, indulges in
false hopes, and is violent toward others.
COMMENTARY
When the modes of goodness and passion are overtaken by the mode of ignorance,
which  destroys  the  power  of  discrimination  and  covers  the  spirit  soul,  one  exhibits
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
616 Chapter 19
grief,  illusion,  envy,  laziness,  lack  of  enthusiasm,  and  impractical  ambitions.  However,
when,  by  engagement  in  the  devotional  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  one  transcends
the influence of the three material modes, one simply feels transcendental ecstasy. This
will be described later on. When the mode of ignorance becomes firmly seated in one’s
heart, having subdued the modes of goodness and passion, one becomes a reservoir of
lamentation, illusion, lethargy, envy, and agression.
yadä cittaà prasédeta indriyäëäà ca nirvåtiù
dehe ‘bhayaà mano-’saìgaà tat sattvaà viddhi mat-padam
When  consciousness  becomes  clear  and  the  senses  are  detached  from  their  objects,
one becomes fearless, even within the material body, and detached from the workings of
the material mind. You should understand this situation to be the predominance of the
mode of goodness, in which one has the opportunity to realize Me.
COMMENTARY
When the heart becomes pure, one’s thirst for sense gratification diminishes almost
to nil. As the mind becomes detached from the three modes of material nature it can
find satisfaction, being fixed at the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
When one is nurturing the mode of goodness, detachment from sense gratification
relieves  one  of  the  hard  labor  required  to  maintain  an  opulent  material  position  and
enables one to devote himself to the service of the Supreme Lord.
vikurvan kriyayä cä-dhér anivåttiç ca cetasäm
gäträsvästhyaà mano bhräntaà raja etair niçämaya
You should understand the influence of the mode of passion by its symptoms—the
clouding of intelligence because of too much activity, the great attachment of the perceiving
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Three Modes of Nature and Beyond
senses to their objects, an unhealthy condition of the working physical organs, and great
disturbance within the mind.
COMMENTARY
When the heart is always disturbed by unlimited desires for acquiring that which
attracts it, and when the senses constantly urge one for gratification, it is to be understood
that the mode of passion is prominent.
PURPORT
Varieties of material attachment, as well as insatiable greed, and continous thirst for
material enjoyment are found in a person who is agitated by the mode of passion.
sédac cittaà viléyeta cetaso grahaëe ‘kñamam
mano nañöaà tamo glänis tamas tad upadhäraya
When one’s higher awareness fails and one is unable to focus his attention, his mind
becomes  dull,  manifesting  ignorance  and  depression.  You  should  understand  this  to  be
caused by a predominance of the mode of ignorance.
COMMENTARY
When the heart becomes practically inert and one is unable to concentrate his mind,
it  is  to  be  understood  that  the  mode  of  ignorance  has  become  prominent.  However,
whatever one’s situation may be under the influence of the modes of nature, if he begins
to cultivate the devotional service of the Lord, beginning with hearing and chanting,
the slackening of the modes will immediately begin to take place.
PURPORT
Those  who  are  deeply  entrenched  in  the  mode  of  ignorance  find  it  very  difficult
to  apply  themselves  to  any  sort  of  regulated  existence.  Being  overwhelmed  by  inertia,
foolishness, and even madness, such persons risk falling down into the lower species of
life.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
618 Chapter 19
edhamäne guëe sattve devänäà balam edhate
asuräëäà ca rajasi tamasy uddhava rakñasäm
O Uddhava, with the increase of the mode of goodness, the strength of the demigods
also increases. When the mode of passion is enhanced, those who are demoniac become
strong,  and  with  the  rise  of  the  mode  of  ignorance,  the  strength  of  wicked  persons
increases.
COMMENTARY
By the increase of the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance, the influence of
the demigods, asuras, and Rakñasas also increases, respectfully. When the mode of pure
goodness  is  enhanced  due  to  the  execution  of  devotional  service,  the  prowess  of  the
devotees flourishes.
PURPORT
The demigods have the tendency to enhance the mode of goodness, the asuras have
the tendency to enhance the mode of passion, and the Rakñasas have the tendency to
enhance the mode of ignorance.
sattväj jägaraëaà vidyäd  rajasä svapnam ädiçet
prasväpaà tamasä jantos turéyaà triñu santatam
It should be understood that alertness is caused by the mode of goodness, sleep with
dreaming is caused by the mode of passion, and deep dreamless sleep is caused by the mode
of  ignorance.  The  fourth  state  of  consciousness,  which  is  transcendental,  continually
exists even as the other three are manifest.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Three Modes of Nature and Beyond
COMMENTARY
The  three  states  of  material  consciousness  are  herein  described  in  relation  to  the
three modes of material nature. The fourth or the transcendental state of consciousness
is not affected by the three material modes.
PURPORT
Those who are in the mode of goodness are awake to their real self-interest. Those
who are predominantly in the mode of passion are sleeping on the lap of the material
nature, dreaming of becoming happy by means of sense gratification. Those who are in
the mode of ignorance are in the deep slumber of nescience, which is practically a state
of unconsciousness. However, those who cultivate the mode of pure goodness are always
under the shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, where there is no influence
of mundane goodness, passion, or ignorance
upary upari gacchanti sattvena brähmaëä janäù
tamasädho ‘dha ä-mukhyäd rajasäntara-cäriëaù
Those who are dedicated to Vedic culture go to the higher planets, such as Brahmaloka,
being absorbed in the mode of goodness. Those who are in the mode of ignorance take
birth  in  the  lower  species  of  life,  and  those  who  in  the  mode  of  passion  continue  to
transmigrate from one human body to another.
COMMENTARY
The mode of goodness carries one to the upper planetary systems, up to Brahmaloka.
The mode of passion causes one to transmigrate in human society. The mode of pure
goodness, which is cultivated by those engaged in devotional service, carries one to the
lotus feet of the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
By the influence of the mode of goodness, knowers of Brahman surpass the çudra’s
lamentation,  the  vaiçya’s  desire  for  wealth,  and  the  kñatriya’s  thirst  for  power  and
influence. Those who are firmly situated in the mode of ignorance gradually go down
to the status of non-moving entities, such as trees. When one is influenced by the mode
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
620 Chapter 19
of passion, he will sometimes advance to a higher status of human birth and sometimes
degrade to an uncivilized one.
sattve pralénäù svar yänti nara-lokaà rajo-layäù
tamo-layäs tu nirayaà yänti mäm eva nirguëäù
Those who leave this world in the mode of goodness go to the heavenly planets, those
who die in the mode of passion remain in the society of human beings, and those who pass
away from the material body in the mode of ignorance go to hell. But those who are free
from the influence of the three modes of material nature, attain My supreme abode.
COMMENTARY
What  happens  to  those  who  die  while  absorbed  in  a  particular  mode  of  nature  is
explained  in  this  verse.  Whenever  a  particular  mode  is  prominent,  it  determines  his
destination after death. If one dies in the mode of goodness, he ascends to the heavenly
planets.  If  one  dies  in  the  mode  of  passion,  he  remains  within  human  society  on
this  earth.  If  one  dies  in  the  mode  of  ignorance,  he  traverses  the  path  to  hell.  The
Supreme Lord has not said “at the time of death” regarding those who are situated on
the  transcendental  platform  because  they  attain  shelter  at  His  lotus  feet  even  before
quitting their present body.
PURPORT
One  who  is  situated  in  the  mode  of  goodness  goes  to  the  heavenly  planets  when
he leaves his present body. One predominantly in the mode of passion, with a touch of
goodness, remains on this earthly planet, and one in the mode of ignorance goes to the
hellish planets. But persons situated beyond the influence of the three modes of material
nature are transcendentally situated and therefore traverse the path to Vaikuëöha.
mad-arpaëaà niñphalaà vä sättvikaà nija-karma tat
räjasaà phala-saìkalpaà hiàsä-präyädi tämasam
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Three Modes of Nature and Beyond
Work done as an offering to Me, without attachment to the result, is in the mode of
goodness. Work performed with the desire to enjoy the results is in the mode of passion,
and violent work impelled by envy is in the mode of ignorance.
COMMENTARY
The fruits of one’s actions should be offered to the Supreme Lord. Çré Närada Muni
has said that if the fruits of one’s activities are not offered to the Lord, then they bind
one to the cycle of birth and death. The word madarpana can also be taken to mean
that  if  activities  performed  in  the  modes  of  passion  and  ignorance  are  offered  to  the
Supreme Lord, they transform into activities in the mode of goodness. If activities are
performed with an intention to enjoy its fruits, they are considered to be in the mode
of passion. Sinful activities performed with the intention of harming others are in the
mode of ignorance. The word ädi, indicating pride and violence, refers to activities in
the mode of ignorance. Activities of devotion, such as chanting and hearing the glories
of the Lord, are transcendental forms of work beyond the modes of nature.
PURPORT
Those on the platform of goodness renounce material enjoyment that is contrary to
religious principles and surrender to the Supreme Lord. Those in the mode of passion
desire  sense  gratification  and  work  very  hard  to  achieve  it.  Those  in  the  mode  of
ignorance manifest pride and envy.
kaivalyaà sättvikaà jïänaà rajo vaikalpikaà ca yat
präkåtaà tämasaà jïänaà man-niñöhaà nirguëaà småtam
Knowledge of the distinction between matter and spirit is in the mode of goodness,
knowledge  based  on  the  dualities  of  material  existence  is  in  the  mode  of  passion,  and
knowledge that simply results in foolishness is in the mode of ignorance. Knowledge of
Me, however, is transcendental.
COMMENTARY
Here the Supreme Lord describes four types of knowledge. Three of these are within
the jurisdiction of the modes of nature, and one is transcendental. The word kaivalyaà
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
622 Chapter 19
means  “that  which  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  material  body,”  and  such  knowledge
is  considered  to  be  sättvika.  Speculative  knowledge  about  the  nature  of  the  self  is
considered to be in the mode of passion, and knowledge of eating, sleeping, mating, and
defending is in the mode of ignorance.
PURPORT
By  rendering  service  to  the  Supreme  Lord,  who  is  one  without  a  second,  the
knowledge of a person who is situated in the mode of goodness is gradually raised to the
transcendental  platform.  A  devotee  is  one  who  accepts  Viñëu  as  his  only  worshipable
Lord and concludes that pleasing Lord Véñëu is the ultimate goal of life. Being deprived
of spiritual knowledge, those who are in the mode of passion desire varieties of material
enjoyment and thus sometimes work feverishly for that end, and sometimes, becoming
disgusted, strive for renunciation. People in the mode of ignorance become intoxicated
while  performing  all  sorts  of  abominable  activities,  and  they  consider  self-ruination
to  be  the  goal  of  life.  The  devotees  of  the  Supreme  Lord  dedicate  themselves  to  the
favorable cultivation of Kåñëa consciousness, knowing that love of Kåñëa is the ultimate
goal of life.
vanaà tu sättviko väso grämo räjasa ucyate
tämasaà dyüta-sadanaà man-niketaà tu nirguëam
Residence in the forest is in the mode of goodness, residence in a town is in the mode
of passion, residence in a gambling house is in the mode of ignorance, and residence in
My abode is transcendental.
COMMENTARY
“To live in a temple or in a holy place is transcendental because the Lord is present
there.” These are the words of Çrédhara Swamé. “As a touchstone turns iron into gold,
similarly the presence of the Supreme Lord turns any place into a transcendental abode.”
These are the words of Jéva Gosvämé.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Three Modes of Nature and Beyond
PURPORT
Many people, desiring to cultivate the mode of goodness, go to reside in the forest
after  giving  up  a  life  of  material  enjoyment.  On  the  path  of  gradual  advancement,
such persons, if they are fortunate, can ultimately realize the transcendental beauty of
Våndävana. Those who are in the mode of passion are busy establishing their name and
fame while either living a life of material pleasure, or attempting to detach themselves
from  such  a  life.  Those  who  are  in  the  mode  of  ignorance  take  pleasure  in  gambling,
and  other  such  abominable  activities.  In  these  verses  the  Lord  clearly  explains  that
all  material  phenomena  may  be  divided  into  three  divisions,  according  to  the  modes
of  nature,  and  that  there  also  exists  a  fourth,  or  transcendental,  division—Kåñëa
consciousness—which elevates all aspects of human culture to the liberated platform.
sättvikaù kärako ‘saìgé rägändho räjasaù småtaù
tämasaù småti-vibhrañöo nirguëo mad-apäçrayaù
A detached worker is in the mode of goodness, a worker blinded by attachment is in
the mode of passion, and a worker with no conception of what is to be done and what
is  not  to  be  done  in  the  mode  of  ignorance.  A  worker  who  has  taken  shelter  of  Me  is
transcendental to the three material modes.
COMMENTARY
The performer of work who is unattached is sättvika. The performer of work who is
blinded by material attachment is räjasika, and the performer of work who has no sense
of discrimination is tämasika. However, the performer of work who is surrendered to the
Supreme Lord is nirguëa.
PURPORT
Those  who  are  in  the  mode  of  goodness  are  inclined  to  solitary  worship  of  the
Lord,  giving  up  all  kinds  of  bad  association.  Those  who  are  in  the  mode  of  passion
are fully engrossed in sense gratification, and those who are in the mode of ignorance
act whimsically, having no sense of discrimination. But pure devotees of the Lord are
transcendental  to  the  three  modes  of  material  nature,  being  under  the  shelter  of  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
624 Chapter 19
Those who live a life of seclusion, as well as those who mingle with sense enjoyers—if
they associate with the devotees of the Supreme Lord while maintaining their separatist
mentalities, remain far from the platform of pure devotional service.
sättviky ädhyätmiké çraddhä karma-çraddhä tu räjasé
tämasy adharme yä çraddhä mat-seväyäà tu nirguëä
Faith in the existence of the eternal self is in the mode of goodness, faith that one’s real
self-interest lies in fruitive activities is in the mode of passion, and faith in sinful activities
is in the mode of ignorance, whereas faith in My devotional service is transcendental.
PURPORT
One who desires his eternal benefit possesses faith in the mode of goodness. One
who  is  bewildered  by  false  ego  possesses  faith  in  the  mode  of  passion,  and  one  who
takes  pleasure  in  performing  sinful  acts  possesses  faith  in  the  mode  of  ignorance.
Those whose faith is transcendental to the three modes of material nature never forget
their  constitutional  position.  While  remaining  aloof  from  material  enjoyment,  they
constantly engage themselves in the service of Lord Kåñëa, and thus become decorated
with transcendental qualities.
pathyaà pütam anäyastam ähäryaà sättvikaà småtam
räjasaà cendriya-preñöhaà tämasaà cärti-däçuci
Food  that  is  nourishing,  pure,  and  obtained  without  difficulty  is  in  the  mode  of
goodness. Food that gives immediate pleasure to the senses is in the mode of passion, and
food that is unclean and causes distress is in the mode of ignorance. Food that has been
offered to Me is transcendental.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Three Modes of Nature and Beyond
COMMENTARY
The word anäyästaà means “that which is obtained without much endeavor.” The
word ca indicates that food which is offered to the Lord is spiritual.
PURPORT
Those  who  are  in  the  mode  of  goodness  only  accept  food  that  is  wholesome  and
pure, and which is obtained without excessive endeavor. Food that titillates the senses
is in the mode of passion, and food such as meat, fish, and eggs, which ultimately causes
distress, is in the mode of ignorance.
sättvikaà sukham ätmotthaà viñayotthaà tu räjasam
tämasaà moha-dainyotthaà nirguëaà mad-apäçrayam
Happiness based on satisfaction is in the mode of goodness, happiness derived from
sense  gratification  is  in  the  mode  of  passion,  and  happiness  derived  from  degraded
activities is in the mode of ignorance. But that happiness which is in relationship to Me
is transcendental.
COMMENTARY
Happiness  derived  from  self-realization  is  in  the  mode  of  goodness,  and  which
is  relished  by  the  devotees  of  the  Lord  by  hearing  and  chanting  His  glories  is
transcendental.
PURPORT
Sättvika  happiness  is  that  which  is  derived  from  the  practices  of  self-realization.
Räjasika happiness is derived from enjoying sense gratification, and tämasika happiness
is  of  a  perverse  nature  and  is  derived  from  foolishness.  Nirguëa,  or  transcendental
happiness, is derived under the shelter of the Supreme Lord after surpassing the three
modes of material nature.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
626 Chapter 19
dravyaà deçaù phalaà kälo jïänaà karma ca kärakaù
çraddhävasthäkåtir niñöhä trai-guëyaù sarva eva hi
Therefore,  material  substance,  place,  result  of  work,  time,  knowledge,  activities,
performers of activities, faith, state of consciousness, species of life, and destination are all
based on the three material modes of nature.
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Lord is herein concluding His instructions. It is the influence of the
three modes of material nature that causes the living entities’ bondage. Objects, such as
pure food, and places, such as the forest, are sättvika. Knowledge about the self, action
without attachment, and the state of awakening, are also in the mode of goodness. If one
leaves his body at the time of death in the mode of goodness, he attains the heavenly
planets. In this way, all activities and states of being are under the influence of the three
modes of material nature.
PURPORT
Material substance, place, result, time, knowledge, activity, performer of work, faith,
species, and destination are based on the three modes of material nature. If all these are
utilized for the service of the Supreme Lord, they transform into spiritual existence.
sarve guëa-mayä bhäväù puruñävyakta-dhiñöhitäù
dåñöaà çrutaà anudhyätaà buddhyä vä puruñarñabha
O best of human beings, all states of being that are heard, seen, or thought of, are the
results of the interaction of the soul with the three modes of material nature.
COMMENTARY
It is practically experienced that anyone who has not taken shelter of the Supreme
Lord, no matter what his situation may be, is surely in the grips of the three modes of
material nature.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Three Modes of Nature and Beyond
PURPORT
Those  who  have  detached  themselves  from  the  objects  of  sense  gratification,  may
imagine  themselves  to  be  liberated  from  material  entanglement.  However,  the  mind,
intelligence,  and  false  ego,  including  their  functions  of  thinking,  feeling,  and  willing,
are also products of matter, and thus not free from the influence of the three modes of
material nature.
etäù saàsåtayaù puàso guëa-karma-nibandhanäù
yeneme nirjitäù saumya guëä jévena citta-jäù
bhakti-yogena man-niñöho mad-bhäväya prapadyate
O gentle one, the living entities’ conditions of material existence are caused by their
activities performed under the influence of the three modes of material nature. One who
conquers  these  modes,  born  from  the  mind,  can  dedicate  himself  to  Me  by  executing
devotional service and thus attain pure love for Me.
COMMENTARY
The  three  modes  of  material  existence  as  the  cause  of  material  existence  is
herein being described. One who has conquered these modes of nature by practice of
devotional service is a transcendental devotee of the Supreme Lord. He is reinstated in
one of the five relationships with the Supreme Lord—çänta, däsya, sakhya, vätsalya and
mädhurya.  A  devotee  of  the  Lord  is  situated  transcendentally,  like  the  Supreme  Lord
Himself. In this regard, one should consider the statement of Lord Kapiladeva, who said,
“I have thus described the symptoms of devotional service.” Here it is also stated that the
influence of the three modes of material nature is subdued by the process of devotional
service. Therefore, it must be concluded that the practice of devotional service is fully
transcendental.  Material  entities,  such  as  incense,  sandalwood  paste,  flowers,  ghee
lamps, an umbrella, or a cämara, when used in the worship of the Supreme Lord, are also
considered transcendental. The faith with which a devotee executes devotional service
is also transcendental. The Supreme Lord has thus confirmed that all objects related to
His service are to be considered transcendental, and not products of the three modes of
material nature.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
628 Chapter 19
PURPORT
The  activities  of  the  conditioned  souls  and  the  creation  that  takes  place  by  the
interaction  of  the  three  modes  of  material  nature  are  the  sum  and  substance  of
conditional  life.  Those  who  are  engaged  in  the  eternal  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord
defeat  the  influence  of  the  three  modes  of  material  nature  by  their  execution  of
devotional service, and ultimately go to reside in the transcendental abode of the Lord
as self-realized souls. There, they serve the Supreme Lord, according to their particular
devotional sentiments.
tasmäd deham imaà labdhvä jïäna-vijïäna-sambhavam
guëa-saìgaà vinirdhüya mäà bhajantu vicakñaëäù
Therefore,  intelligent  persons,  having  received  the  human  form  of  body,  which
enables one to cultivate spiritual knowledge and its practical application, should give up
the  association  of  the  three  material  modes  of  nature  and  continuously  engage  in  My
service.
COMMENTARY
The human form of life is the opportunity to cultivate spiritual knowledge and its
practical application, engagement in the devotional service of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.
PURPORT
As  long  as  one  considers  devotional  service  to  the  Supreme  Lord  to  be  a  product
of  matter,  one  will  be  forced  to  accept  either  the  path  of  material  enjoyment  or  dry
renunciation. Only in the human form of life is the opportunity to worship the Supreme
Lord  attained,  after  surpassing  the  influence  of  the  three  modes  of  material  nature.
That is why the Supreme Lord instructs the conditioned souls to rise above the three
modes of material nature.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Three Modes of Nature and Beyond
niùsaìgo mäà bhajed vidvän apramatto jitendriyaù
rajas tamaç cäbhijayet sattva-saàsevayä muniù
One  who  is  actually  intelligent,  who  is  free  from  all  material  association  and  not
bewildered, should subdue his senses and worship Me. He should conquer the modes of
passion and ignorance by engaging himself only in relation to the mode of goodness.
COMMENTARY
The  Supreme  Lord  describes  the  process  of  bhajan.  The  word  niùsaìga  means
“without any tinge of karma, jïäna, and so on.” One may question, “What should one
do if he has faith in the Supreme Lord, but also possesses sättvika, räjasika, or tämasika
faith?  The  answer  is  that  if  one  is  exclusively  engaged  in  devotional  service,  by  the
strength of that transcendental activity, he will be able to conquer the three modes of
material nature. The Supreme Lord Himself has earlier confirmed this. If one’s activities
are all engaged for the satisfaction of the Lord, one can rise above the three modes of
material nature. One should carefully cultivate the mode of goodness and thus subdue
the modes of passion and ignorance.
PURPORT
After  abandoning  all  endeavors  for  material  enjoyment  and  dry  renunciation,  he
can certainly defeat the influence of the modes of passion and ignorance, with the help
of the mode of goodness, by engaging himself in the devotional service of the Lord.
sattvaà cäbhijayed yukto nairapekñyeëa çänta-dhéù
sampadyate guëair mukto jévo jévaà vihäya mäm
Being  fixed  in  devotional  service,  one  should  then  conquer  the  mode  of  goodness
by means of indifference. Being pacified within his mind, the spirit soul, freed from the
modes of nature, thus gives up the very cause of his conditioned life and attains Me.
COMMENTARY
The  platform  of  pure  goodness  is  transcendental  to  the  three  modes  of  material
nature. By the execution of devotional service, one automatically develops detachment
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 19
uddhava-gétä
from the three modes of material nature. When one attains this transcendental stage,
he discards his subtle body and goes back to Godhead.
jévo jéva-vinirmukto guëaiç cäçaya-sambhavaiù
mayaiva brahmaëä pürëo na bahir näntaraç caret
Being freed from the conditioning of the mind, as well as from the modes of nature born
of material consciousness, the living entity becomes completely satisfied by experiencing
My transcendental existence, so that he no longer searches for enjoyment in the external
energy.
COMMENTARY
Internal enjoyment refers to that enjoyment which is experienced by the subtle body.
Feelings of lust, anger, happiness, and illusion are in this category. External enjoyment
refers to the activities of the gross senses.
PURPORT
Being  situated  on  the  platform  of  transcendental  satisfaction,  when  a  devotee
transcends even the mode of goodness, he is situated on the platform of pure devotional
service  to  the  Supreme  Lord.  Simply  by  the  influence  of  devotional  service,  the  two
propensities of material enjoyment and detachment which are exhibited on the platform
of  goodness  are  dispelled.  When  a  liberated  soul  is  engaged  in  the  transcendental
service of the sac-cid-änanda Lord, the modes of material nature cannot touch him. In
this chapter, Lord Kåñëa enumerated the characteristics of the three modes of material
nature and described the devotional service of the Lord as being transcendental to these
modes. Lord Caitanya has recommended that in this age, one should incessantly chant
the holy names of the Lord as the best means of engaging in devotional service and thus
transcending the modes of material nature.
Thus  end  the  translation  of  the  nineteenth  chapter  of  the  Uddhava-géta  entitled
“The Three Modes of Nature and Beyond” with the commentaries of Çréla Viçvanätha
Cakravarté  Öhäkura  and  chapter  summary  and  purports  by  Çréla  Bhaktisiddhänta
Sarasvaté Öhäkura.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 20
the aILa-gétä
CHAPTER SUMMARY
This  chapter  explains  how  unfavorable  association  is  a  threat  to  one’s  position  in
devotional service, and how by associating with saintly persons one can easily advance
in devotional service.
The  jéva  who  has  received  a  human  body,  which  is  a  very  favorable  condition  for
achieving  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  and  who  has  situated  himself  in  the
devotional service to the Lord becomes capable of realizing His transcendental nature.
Such a person, fully dedicated to the Supreme Personality, becomes liberated from the
influence  of  Maya,  even  while  continuing  to  reside  in  this  world  created  by  illusory
energy  of  the  Lord.  Those  souls,  on  the  other  hand,  who  are  bound  up  by  Maya,  are
devoted  only  to  their  bellies  and  genitals.  They  are  impure,  and  by  associating  with
them, one will fall down into the dark well of ignorance.
The  emperor,  Purüravä,  who  was  bewildered  by  the  association  of  the  heavenly
damsel, Urvaçé, later became renounced after being separated from her. He thus sang a
song expressing his contempt for intimate association with a woman. He said that men
who are attached to the body of a woman, which is simply a combination of skin, flesh,
blood, sinew, brain tissue, marrow, and bones, are not much different from worms. What
is the value of one’s education, austerity, renunciation, study of the Vedas, solitude and
silence, if one’s mind becomes stolen away by the body of a woman? Learned men should
distrust  their  six  enemies,  headed  by  lust,  and  thus  avoid  associating  with  women,  or
with  men  who  are  controlled  by  women.  After  declaring  these  facts,  King  Purüravä,
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
632 Chapter 20
now freed from the illusion of material existence, attained realization of the Supreme
Lord as the Supersoul.
In  conclusion,  one  who  is  intelligent  should  give  up  bad  association  and  instead
take to the company of saintly persons. By their transcendental instructions, the saintly
devotees  of  the  Lord  can  break  the  false  attachments  that  dwell  within  one’s  mind.
Real saints are liberated and devoted to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In their
association,  there  are  constant  discussions  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  who  by  serving,  the
spirit soul can eradicate his material sins and obtain pure devotional service. When one
is engaged in the devotional service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the
original ocean of unlimited qualities, what else remains to be gained?
çré-bhagavän uväca
mal-lakñaëam imaà käyaà labdhvä mad-dharma ästhitaù
änandaà paramätmänam ätma-sthaà samupaiti mäm
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Having attained the human form of life,
which enables one to realize Me, and being engaged in My devotional service, one can
achieve Me, the reservoir of all pleasure and the Supreme Soul of all existence who resides
within the heart of every living entity.
COMMENTARY
In  this  chapter,  the  Lord  explains  to  Uddhava  how  attachment  to  a  woman  can
bewilder  even  an  exalted  soul,  and  association  of  advanced  devotees  awakens  one’s
Kåñëa consciousness.
Lord  Kåñëa  had  previously  advised  that  a  learned  person  should  worship  Him
while avoiding the association of non-devotees, and in this chapter, the danger of bad
association is illustrated by a practical example. One who is intelligent should carefully
avoid bad association, because it can be a great impediment to the execution of devotional
service. The association of women is especially dangerous. Therefore, even those in this
world  who  are  liberated  should  be  afraid  of  intimately  associating  with  a  woman.  In
this verse, the Lord says that after obtaining the human form of life, which gives one
the opportunity to realize Him, one should remain on the path of devotional service to
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Aila-gétä
achieve the association of the Lord, who is the Supersoul dwelling within the hearts of
all living entities.
PURPORT
The human form of life is a golden opportunity to become established in the devotional
service  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  When  one  renounces  the  bodily  concept  of  life  and  all
attempts at mental speculation, and wholeheartedly engages in the devotional service of
the Supersoul, he revives his original love of God. The conception of impersonalism, as
well as desires to enjoy the fruits of one’s karma, in this life and the next, simply create
disturbances within the mind.
guëa-mayyä jéva-yonyä vimukto jïäna-niñöhayä
guëeñu mäyä-mätreñu dåçyamäneñv avastutaù
vartamäno ‘pi na pumän yujyate ‘vastubhir guëaiù
One who is fixed in transcendental knowledge becomes freed from conditioned life by
giving up his false identification with the products of the three modes of material nature.
Seeing these products as illusion, he avoids entanglement in the modes of nature, although
constantly surrounded by them. Because the modes of nature and their products are not
eternal facts, he does not accept them as ultimate reality.
COMMENTARY
The material designations of the living entities are born from the three modes of
material nature. One who has become detached from all material forms, qualities, and
objects  has  attained  the  perfection  of  life.  Even  though  a  self-realized  soul  remains
within the material world, which is manifested by the modes of nature, he, unlike the
conditioned soul, does not become attached to any object, knowing everything to be the
property of the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
Those having knowledge of the Supreme Lord, and who are engaged in His devotional
service, do not consider the objects of the material world to be meant for their personal
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
634 Chapter 20
sense  gratification.  Those  who  are  fond  of  voracious  eating  and  sense  gratification
consider all the objects of this world as being meant for their enjoyment. It is essential
for one who desires to advance in spiritual life to give up the association of such people.
As a result of associating with people whose aim in life is to satisfy the urges of the belly
and  genitals,  one  becomes  either  a  sense  enjoyer  or  a  dry  renunciate,  both  of  which
cause one to continue in material bondage. The devotees of the Lord are indifferent to
such material enjoyment and pseudo renunciation. They renounce their personal sense
gratification to assist the Supreme Lord in His eternal pastimes. Those who accept as
a spiritual master a person who is blinded by material enjoyment, certainly enters the
darkest regions of ignorance. The Mäyävädés are in this category. One should therefore
carefully avoid the association of sense enjoyers and pseudo renunciates.
saìgaà na kuryäd asatäà çiçnodara-tåpäà kvacit
tasyänugas tamasy andhe pataty andhänugändha-vat
One should never associate with non-devotees, who are only interested in satisfying
their  bellies  and  genitals.  By  following  them,  one  will  fall  into  the  densest  regions  of
darkness, just as a blind man falls into a ditch when led by another blind man.
COMMENTARY
One  should  not  indulge  in  bad  association  at  any  stage  of  life.  There  is  nothing
more detrimental to spiritual life than the association of non-devotees. Who are non-
devotees? Whose association is undesirable? Those whose aim in life is simply to gratify
their bellies and genitals. What to speak of associating with many such people, even by
the association of one sense enjoyer, one can become degraded.
ailaù samräò imäà gäthäm agäyata båhac-chraväù
urvaçé-virahän muhyan nirviëëaù çoka-saàyame
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Aila-gétä
The glorious King Purüravä became bewildered due to separation from the Apsarä,
Urvaçé.  Later  on,  however,  he  regained  her  association  at  Kurukñetra.  Thereafter,  he
performed  a  sacrifice  with  the  help  of  the  Gandharvas  and  thus  pleased  the  demigods.
Finally, when he attained the planet of Urvaçé, so that the cause of his lamentation was
vanquished, he sang the following song.
COMMENTARY
The  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  Lord  Kåñëa,  narrates  the  history  of  Aila,
or  King  Purüravä,  in  this  chapter.  Pururavä  had  become  overwhelmed  with  grief  due
to  separation  from  Urvaçé  but  later,  at  Kurukñetra,  he  regained  her  association.  He
then performed a sacrifice with fire given to him by the Gandharvas and thus attained
the  planet  of  Urvaçé.  When  he  became  free  from  lamentation,  and  his  desire  for
sense  gratification  was  vanquished,  he  revived  his  forgotten  attraction  for  devotional
service, spiritual knowledge, and renunciation, which had been impeded due to strong
attachment. He then sang the following song. This history is also related in the Ninth
Canto of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
tyaktvätmänaà vrayantéà täà nagna unmatta-van nåpaù
vilapann anvagäj jäye ghore tiñöheti viklavaù
When Urvaçé was leaving the king for her own abode, even though he was naked, he
ran after her like a madman with great affliction, crying out, “O dear one, please wait!”
COMMENTARY
As Urvaçé was leaving the king, he lamented, “O dear one, why are you going? You
are killing me. Please wait!”
kämän atåpto ‘nujuñan kñullakän varña-yäminéù
na veda yäntér näyäntér urvaçy-äkåñöa-cetanaù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
636 Chapter 20
Although  for  many  years  Purüravä  had  enjoyed  sex  with  Urvaçé,  he  was  still  not
satisfied by such insignificant enjoyment. Indeed, he was so captivated by Urvaçé that he
did not notice how the days and nights were passing.
COMMENTARY
The king was overwhelmed by material desires.
¯¯ 3HÌ=
aila uväca
aho me moha-vistäraù käma-kaçmala-cetasaù
devyä gåhéta-kaëöhasya näyuù-khaëòä ime småtäù
King Aila said: Alas! Just see how I have become illusioned! The goddess captured me
by her embraces, so that, being enamored, I could not even tell how time was passing.
COMMENTARY
The king lamented, “I spent so many years of my life simply gratifying my senses.”
nähaà vedäbhinirmuktaù süryo väbhyudito ‘muyä
müñito varña-pügänäà batähäni gatäny uta
I was cheated by that lady so that I did not even notice the rising or setting of the sun.
So many years of my life have thus been wasted!
COMMENTARY
The  king’s  bewilderment  is  herein  explained.  He  lamented,  “I  was  so  engrossed
in  sense  gratification  that  I  did  not  even  notice  how  the  sun  was  rising  and  setting.”
Although the word surya is used in the second dative case, it indicates the meaning of
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Aila-gétä
the first dative case. The word veda, although used in the past tense, is supposed to be
in the present tense—the first dative case. When one is fast asleep, he is in darkness,
whether it be day or night. The king thought, “Why did I not know this? Because my
power of discrimination was stolen by Urvaçé, I was not aware of how many days and
nights were passing.”
PURPORT
Due  to  absorption  in  sense  gratification,  King  Pururavä  forgot  about  the  service
of the Supreme Lord. He abandoned the worship of the Supreme Lord, which was his
practice,  so  that  he  could  enjoy  the  intimate  association  of  Urvaçé.  Realizing  that  he
has wasted his valuable time, the king became repentant. The sädhana-siddha devotees,
who are on the platform of love of God, cannot bear to waste even a second.
aho me ätma-sammoho yenätmä yoñitäà kåtaù
kréòä-mågaç cakravarté naradeva-çikhämaëiù
Alas!  Although  I  was  the  mighty  emperor,  the  crown  jewel  of  all  the  kings  of  the
earth, due to bewilderment I became just like a pet animal in the hands of a woman!
COMMENTARY
The mighty king lamented how he had become no better than a pet animal engaged
in satisfying the whims of a woman.
sa-paricchadam ätmänaà hitvä tåëam iveçvaram
yäntéà striyaà cänvagamaà nagna unmatta-vad rudan
Although I am a mighty emperor with great opulence, that woman left me as if I were
no  better  than  a  blade  of  grass.  Without  shame  and  naked,  I  cried  out  like  a  madman
while following her.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
638 Chapter 20
COMMENTARY
The king lamented that although he was the undisputed emperor of the world, she
had abandoned him as if he were an insignificant straw, even though he followed her
while crying out piteously.
PURPORT
By  giving  up  the  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  the  conditioned  souls  become
intoxicated  by  the  spirit  of  enjoyment  and  forget  their  own  self-interest.  When  one
realizes his constitutional position, he immediately understands that his enthusiasm for
material activities is actually of no consequence.
kutas tasyänubhävaù syät teja éçatvam eva vä
yo ‘nvagacchaà striyaà yäntéà khara-vat päda-täòitaù
Where  were  my  great  influence,  prowess,  and  sovereignty?  Just  like  an  ass  being
kicked in the face by a she-ass, I ran after that woman, although she had already given
me up.
COMMENTARY
One might question the king: “Being the undisputed ruler of the entire earth, how
could you fall into such a pathetic condition?” The answer is: “What was the use of my
opulence, prowess, and influence? Even after being rejected by Urvaçé, I ran after her,
just like an ass being kicked in the face by a she-ass.”
PURPORT
For the pleasure of the association of a female ass, a male ass may receive only kicks
in his face. Similarly, because the spirit of enjoyment is very strong in conditioned souls,
who sometimes must face unbearable insults and inconveniences, he remains attached
to the objects of the senses, especially the form of a beautiful woman.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Aila-gétä
kià vidyayä kià tapasä kià tyägena çrutena vä
kià viviktena maunena strébhir yasya mano håtam
What  is  the  use  of  a  comprehensive  education,  the  practice  of  austerities  and
renunciation, a lengthy study of the religious scriptures, or living in solitude if, after all
that, one’s mind is stolen by a woman?
COMMENTARY
King Aila thought, “All kinds of endeavors are useless for a person like me.”
PURPORT
One’s  power  of  discrimination,  performance  of  austerities,  receiving  instructions
for  spiritual  advancement,  residing  in  a  solitary  place,  and  detachment  from  sense
gratification can be destroyed in a moment by the association of a beautiful woman.
If one follows the example of the gopés of Våndävana, who accepted Lord Çré Kåñëa
as their paramour, one can free one’s mind from the contamination of lust.
svärthasyäkovidaà dhiì mäà mürkhaà paëòita-mäninam
yo ‘ham éçvaratäà präpya strébhir go-khara-vaj jitaù
Shame on Me! I was ignorant of my real self-interest, although I considered myself to
be highly learned. Although I achieved the exalted position of being the lord of the earth,
I was controlled by a woman, just like a bullock or an ass.
COMMENTARY
Being  maddened  by  desires  for  sense  enjoyment,  foolish  people,  although  they
consider  themselves  to  be  very  intelligent  and  learned,  actually  suffer  while  serving
their animalistic propensities while enjoying the company of women. Only by the mercy
of the spiritual master and saintly persons can one gradually understand that such an
engagement  is  actually  abominable.  The  condition  of  those  who  are  intoxicated  by
material  enjoyment  so  that  they  have  become  menial  servants  of  lust  is  undoubtedly
pathetic.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
640 Chapter 20
sevato varña-pügän me urvaçyä adharäsavam
Na tåpyaty ätma-bhüù kämo vahnir ähutibhir yathä
Even after I had tasted the nectar of Urvaçé’s  lips for many years, my lusty desires
kept rising within my heart because they were never satisfied, just like a fire, which is
never extinguished by the oblations of ghee poured into its flames.
COMMENTARY
King Aila lamented, “The lusty desires within my heart never became satiated, even
after enjoying the association of Urvaçé for many years.”
puàçcalyäpahåtaà cittaà ko nv anyo mocituà prabhuù
ätmärämeçvaram åte bhagavantam adhokñajam
Who but the Supreme Lord of all self-satisfied transcendentalists, who exists beyond
the purview of the material senses, could redeem my fallen soul that was captured by a
prostitute? Therefore, I shall become serious about worshiping the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.
COMMENTARY
How did this change of heart take place? How did King Aila become detached from
the desire to drink the nectar of Urvaçé’s lips? The answer is given herein. He thought,
“Who other than the Supreme Lord would be able to deliver me? Even self-satisfied sages
cannot change the heart of a person like me, who is extremely fond of sensual pleasures.
But, the master of all self-realized souls, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, certainly
can accomplish this.”
PURPORT
Those  who  depend  upon  their  knowledge  gained  by  sense  perception  are  always
disturbed  in  mind.  As  long  as  one  does  not  experience  satisfaction  in  the  self  in  his
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Aila-gétä
relationship with the Supreme Lord, one’s attraction for the objects of the senses will
continue.  However,  such  an  ignorant  condition  of  life  is  immediately  dissipated  when
one  acts  under  the  guidance  of  a  bona  fide  spiritual  master.  However,  those  who  are
sense  enjoyers  have  a  weakness  of  heart  that  causes  them  to  take  shelter  of  women,
posing themselves as enjoyers. By being tempted by material enjoyment and thus avoiding
the service of the Supreme Lord, one will never achieve freedom from the bondage of
material existence.
bodhitasyäpi devyä me sükta-väkyena durmateù
mano-gato mahä-moho näpayäty ajitätmanaù
Because I allowed my intelligence to become stunted, and because I failed to control
my  senses,  my  mind  remained  bewildered,  even  though  Urvaçé  personally  warned  me
with her intelligent instructions.
COMMENTARY
In  the  Ninth  Canto  of  the  Çrémad-Bhägavatam,  it  is  seen  that  Urvaçé  frankly
instructed Purüravä that he should never place his faith in a woman. Still, he became
attached to her and as a result, he suffered.
PURPORT
The uncontrolled sense enjoyer, Purüravä, could not seriously take the good advice
of  Urvaçé.  Until  one  realizes  that  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  is  the  only
enjoyer and that all women should be regarded as spiritual masters, one’s mentality will
not be purified of the contamination of lust.
kim etayä no ‘pakåtaà rajjvä vä sarpa-cetasaù
drañöuù svarüpäviduño yo ‘haà yad ajitendriyaù
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
642 Chapter 20
How can I blame her for my difficulties when it is I who acted out of ignorance? I did
not control my senses, and so I am like a person who mistakes a rope for a snake.
COMMENTARY
It  was  said  that  Pururavä’s  heart  had  been  captured  by  the  prostitute.  Now,  the
king  says,  “Whatever  happened  was  my  fault  and  not  hers.  One  who  mistakes  a  rope
for a snake suffers fear and anxiety due to being deluded. Because I considered her to
be enjoyable by me, it was my ignorance that was the cause of my suffering, and not her
personally.”
PURPORT
To consider the objects of material nature to be meant for one’s enjoyment instead of
being employed in the service of the master of nature, the Supreme Lord, is an example
of illusion. Such an illusion is like accepting a rope as a snake. Although a rope cannot
bite and thus is not an actual cause of fear, one who mistakes a rope for a snake becomes
frightened. Similarly, the misconception of considering one’s self to be the lord of all he
surveys creates bewilderment in the mind of the conditioned soul. The Supreme Lord
and His energies are worshipable for the living entities but the conditioned souls invite
inauspiciousness  by  seeing  everything  as  enjoyable  for  themselves.  The  constitutional
position of the living entity is to serve the senses of the master of the senses with one’s
purified senses. One should be cognizant of his fallen position and thus remain humbler
than  a  blade  of  grass  so  that  the  allurements  of  temporary  enjoyment  will  no  longer
hamper his advancement in Kåñëa consciousness.
kväyaà malémasaù kayo daurgandhyädy-ätmako ‘çuciù
kva guëäù saumanasyädyä hy adhyäso ‘vidyayä kåtaù
What is this material body, which is so contaminated and full of bad odors? I was
attracted by a woman’s beauty and fragrance, without considering that these are simply
coverings of an obnoxious body. Thus I was under the spell of illusion.
COMMENTARY
King Aila thought, “The so-called beauty, sweetness, and other attractive qualities
possessed by Urvaçé were not the cause of my illusion. Such qualities were imagined by
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Aila-gétä
me because of ignorance. This material body, which is subject to transformation, cannot
be ultimate reality. The sweet aroma, fresh youth, and other attractive qualities are simply
illusions created by material nature, and yet I foolishly attributed such characteristics to
Urvaçé herself.”
PURPORT
The material body is awarded to one who desires to enjoy independently from the
Supreme Lord, and it is stated herein that it is impure and essentially disgusting. When
the living entity, by misuse of his minute independence, deviates from his constitutional
duty, he is placed in ignorance and becomes afflicted with material miseries. Thus the
mind, which is either engaged in sense gratification, distressed due to a lack of it, or in a
mood of renunciation as a result of frustration, is certainly overcome by delusion. When
one  withdraws  his  senses  from  their  objects,  knowing  that  everything  in  existence
is  owned  and  controlled  by  the  Lord,  who  is  the  supreme  enjoyer,  one  comes  to  the
platform of auspiciousness.
TEXTS 19-20
pitroù kià svaà nu bhäryäyäù svämino ‘gneù çva-gådhrayoù
kim ätmanaù kià suhådäm iti yo nävaséyate
tasmin kalevare ‘medhye tuccha-niñöhe viñajjate
aho su-bhadraà su-nasaà su-smitaà ca mukhaà striyaù
It can never be understood whose property the body is. Does the body belong to the
parents, who enabled one to take birth? Does the body belong to one’s wife, who gives it
pleasure, or to one’s master? Does it belong to the funeral pyre, or to the dogs that may
one  day  devour  it?  Does  it  belong  to  the  spirit  soul  who  experiences  its  pleasures  and
pains, or does it belong to one’s friends, who provide comfort? Although one can never
understand who is the proprietor of the body, one certainly becomes very attached to it.
Although the material body is destined to become ashes, worms, or stool, a man gazed at
the face of a beautiful woman and thinks, “Oh! She is very attractive! What a charming
nose she has, and just see her beautiful smile!”
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
644 Chapter 20
COMMENTARY
Attachment for material body is simply due to ignorance. This is being stressed in
these verses. Does the body belong to the parents, who gave birth to it? Does it belong to
one’s wife, who supplies it sense gratification? Does it belong to the husband who enjoys
it?  After  death,  the  body  is  burnt—does  that  mean  that  it  belongs  to  the  fire?  If  the
body is not burnt, it may be thrown to the jackals and vultures. Does the body belong
to them? Or, does it belong to the soul who is responsible for its pleasant and unpleasant
conditions? Does this body belong to one’s well-wishers because they encourage it? This
material body is temporary, insignificant, and abominable, and ultimately abandoned.
Therefore, glorification of the material body is certainly an act of foolishness.
PURPORT
The  relationships  established  between  one  person  and  another  in  this  material
world are based upon the material body. All such relationships, such as those of parents
and children, wife and husband, fire and the burning body, dogs and jackals and their
food—the  dead  body,  as  well  as  one’s  relationship  with  well-wishers  and  enemies,  are
temporarily manifested.
tvaì-mäàsa-rudhira-snäyu-medo-majjästhi-saàhatau
vië-mütra-püye ramatäà kåméëäà kiyad antaram
What difference is there  between worms and those who take pleasure in the material
body,  which  is  composed  of  skin,  flesh,  blood,  nerves,  pus,  bone,  marrow,  stool  and
urine?
COMMENTARY
King Aila thought, “What is the difference between me and the worm that enjoys
the material body, which is composed of obnoxious substances, such as stool, urine, and
pus?”
PURPORT
What is the distinction between worms and human beings who consider the material
body, which is a bag of stool, urine, blood, bones, pus, and so forth, as the self and are
attached to sense gratification?
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Aila-gétä
athäpi nopasajjeta stréñu straiëeñu cärtha-vit
viñayendriya-saàyogän manaù kñubhyati nänyathä
After carefully considering the nature of the material body, one who is wise should
neither associate with women, nor those who are addicted to women. After all, as soon
as there is proximity between the senses and their objects, the mind is sure to become
agitated.
COMMENTARY
Although  the  body  of  a  woman  is  composed  of  abominable  substances,  a  man
becomes attached to it. Therefore, the Supreme Lord is herein recommending that one
should  not  intimately  associate  with  members  of  the  opposite  sex.  One  who  is  wise,
being aware of his real self-interest, should not allow himself to become attached to the
body of a woman. Even if one must see women in the course of one’s daily activities, he
should stay aloof from their intimate association. As soon as the senses come in contact
with their objects, the mind becomes agitated.
PURPORT
Sense enjoyers are always busy directing their minds to the objects of gratification.
When one renders practical devotional service to the Supreme Lord, objects related to
the Lord’s service will become the subject of one’s attention rather than objects meant
for one’s personal gratification. In this way, by diverting the mind to the service of the
Lord, the inclination for material enjoyment or false renunciation will be subdued.
adåñöäd açrutäd bhävän na bhäva upajäyate
asamprayuïjataù präëän çämyati stimitaà manaù
The mind does not become agitated by things that are unknown or unheard of, and
so the minds of those who control their senses become steady and peaceful.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
646 Chapter 20
COMMENTARY
One may question, “Doesn’t the mind of a sage who lives in a solitary forest sometimes
become  agitated  while  contemplating  sense  gratification?”  This  is  true  but  such  an
experience is due to previous sense gratification that one repeatedly experienced, saw,
or  heard  about.  If  a  person  withdraws  his  senses  from  their  objects,  especially  from
intimate  association  with  women,  the  mind  will  gradually  become  steady  as  material
desires become extinguished, like a fire without fuel.
PURPORT
The mind always engages its servant, the eyes, in seeing beautiful forms, and engages
the ears in hearing pleasant sounds, and so forth. If one refrains from hearing the glories
of the master of the senses, Lord Kåñëa, being induced by the material conception of
life, one will be forced to act as the servant of his senses, which act under the dictation
of the restless mind.
tasmät saìgo na kartavyaù stréñu straiëeñu cendriyaiù
viduñäà cäpy avisrabdhaù ñaò-vargaù kim u mädåçäm
Therefore, one should not let his senses freely associate with women, or those who
are attached to women. Even learned persons cannot trust the six enemies of the mind,
headed by lust, anger, and greed, and so what to speak of a foolish person like me.
COMMENTARY
The six enemies of the mind are lust, anger, greed, pride, illusion, and envy, and they
are never to be trusted.
PURPORT
Materialistic  people  are  attached  to  the  objects  of  sense  gratification,  headed  by
women. The knowledge that is acquired by sense perception and mental speculation is
unsteady. If this is the case of even learned persons, then what can be said of unabashed
sense enjoyers? Therefore, it is herein advised that one completely give up the association
of women, and those who are attached to women. The thinking, feeling, and willing of
the mind must be employed in enhancing one’s devotional service to Lord Kåñëa.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Aila-gétä
çré-bhagavän uväca
evaà pragäyan nåpa-deva-devaù sa urvaçé-lokam atho vihäya
ätmänam ätmany avagamya mäà vai upäramaj jïäana-vidhüta-mohaù
The  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  said:  After  chanting  this  song,  Mahäräja
Purüravä, foremost among the demigods and human beings, gave up his position in the
planet of Urvaçé. His illusion dispelled by transcendental knowledge, he understood Me
to be the Supreme Soul within his heart, and so finally achieved peace.
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Lord said: King Pururavä, the best of kings and demigods, realized Me
to be the object of love and thereafter left his body.
PURPORT
While  singing  the  Aila-géta,  Pururavä  made  up  his  mind  to  leave  the  abode  of
Urvaçé. Realizing the Supreme Personality of Godhead to be the shelter of all rasa, and
understanding that attachment to imperfect mundane rasa is an act of ignorance, King
Pururavä gave up all aspirations for material enjoyment.
tato duùsaìgam utsåjya satsu sajjeta buddhimän
santa eväsya chindanti mano-vyäsaìgam uktibhiù
An intelligent person should therefore should give up all bad association and instead
associate with saintly devotees, whose instructions destroy the material attachment within
the mind.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
648 Chapter 20
COMMENTARY
Material  attachment  must  be  renounced  and  the  association  of  devotees  must  be
pursued. It is the instructions of the devotees of the Lord that are able to vanquish one’s
strong attachment to sense gratification. Pious acts, visits to holy places, the demigods,
and knowledge of the scriptures do not have such power.
PURPORT
For the benefit of those who would follow in the footsteps of Uddhava in the future,
the  Supreme  Lord  narrated  the  history  of  how  Pururavä  became  a  servant  of  Urvaçé,
desiring to enjoy her attractive feminine features, and yet this put him into great danger.
Here, we see how the king obtained auspiciousness by renouncing the mentality of being
an  enjoyer.  The  conclusion  is  that  an  intelligent  person  should  free  himself  from  the
thirst for material enjoyment by receiving the pure and powerful instructions of saintly
persons. Such instructions help one to become strongly situated in Kåñëa consciousness
and thus automatically rise above the platform of duality, which is based on ignorance.
santo ‘napekñä mac-cittäù praçäntäù sama-darçinaù
nirmamä nirahaìkärä nirdvandvä niñparigrahäù
My devotees fix their minds on Me and do not depend upon any material conditions.
They are always peaceful, free from possessiveness, false ego, duality and greed, and they
view others with equal vision.
COMMENTARY
Devotees do not depend upon karma, jïäna, or other human beings and demigods,
who are, after all, concerned with their own self-interest. One may question, “Do not
the devotees depend upon someone?” Here, the Lord gives the reply by saying, “Saintly
persons are those whose hearts are fixed on Me.” Someone may say, “Kaàsa’s mind was
also fixed upon Kåñëa but he is not considered a devotee.” Therefore, the Lord clarifies:
“The  devotees  are  peaceful.  They  have  conquered  anger.  They  do  not  retaliate,  even
if they are attacked. This is because they treat all living entities equally, whether they
be  so-called  friends,  enemies,  or  neutral  parties.  This  is  because  they  have  conquered
the false ego. They are thus free from envy, false proprietorship, and false pride. They
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Aila-gétä
are equal both in honor and in dishonor because they have transcended the dualities
of this material world.” Someone may then question, “Is it possible for householders to
become devotees?” The answer is, “Yes. Devotees are those who have renounced material
attachment and it does not matter whether they are in household life or reside in the
forest.”
PURPORT
Many people think that simply by artificially renouncing coveted things they can
become  peaceful,  transcendentally  situated  above  duality,  and  free  from  false  ego,
material  ambition,  and  proprietorship.  However,  such  an  artificial  mental  adjustment
does not remain fixed. It is only on the strength of one’s favorable cultivation of Kåñëa
consciousness  that  qualities  such  as  freedom  from  envy  and  possessiveness  manifest
within  the  purified  heart.  When  one  gives  up  the  service  of  his  material  senses  and
engages in the cultivation of God consciousness, he gradually becomes free from dualities,
false proprietorship, and false ego, and becomes endowed with equal vision.
teñu nityaà mahä-bhäga mahä-bhägeñu mat-kathäù
sambhavanti hi tä nèëäà juñatäà prapunanty agham
O greatly fortunate Uddhava, in the association of saintly devotees there is constant
discussion  of  Me.  Those  who  engage  in  hearing  and  chanting  My  glories  are  certainly
purified of all sins.
COMMENTARY
The instructions of the saintly persons contain nothing but the instructions of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
tä ye çåëvanti gäyanti hy anumodanti cädåtäù
mat-paräù çraddadhänäç ca bhaktià vindanti te mayi
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
650 Chapter 20
Whoever hears, chants, and respectfully takes to heart the discussions of Me becomes
dedicated to Me and thus achieves My devotional service.
PURPORT
Generally,  material  knowledge  is  gained  by  hearing.  Because  the  transcendental
names, forms, qualities, and pastimes of the Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa, are always discussed
by saintly persons, the conditioned souls get an opportunity to hear about them. As a
result  of  this,  their  propensity  for  sinful  activities  can  slacken.  Simply  by  hearing  the
talks of an exalted personality, one can acquire transcendental knowledge and thereby
free  himself  from  the  thirst  for  sense  gratification.  One  who  diligently  follows  the
instructions of the devotees becomes situated in his constitutional duty of serving Lord
Hari.  When  a  living  entity  is  thus  engaged  in  the  devotional  service  of  the  Lord,  he
naturally develops attachment for glorifying the Lord and residing in the abode of the
Lord. As a result, he soon manifests divine qualities, such as tolerance, detachment, and
freedom from envy and false ego. The polluted workings of the mind are checked, one
sees things in a new light, and there blossoms the propensity for selfless loving service
to the Lord, which ultimately awards one the fruit of love of Godhead.
bhaktià labdhavataù sädhoù kim anyad avaçiñyate
mayy ananta-guëe brahmaëy änandänubhavätmani
I am the Supreme Brahman, the reservoir of unlimited transcendental qualities, and
the embodiment of spiritual bliss. After attaining My devotional service, there is nothing
more to be achieved.
COMMENTARY
One may question, “After attaining devotional service to the Supreme Lord, is there
anything remaining to be achieved?” In this verse, the Lord clearly replies, “No, there
is  nothing  more  to  be  attained  because  devotional  service  awards  one  the  perfection
of  everything.”  The  impersonalists’  conception  of  liberation  entails  giving  up  their
individual identity, and thus does not award complete satisfaction of the self.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Aila-gétä
PURPORT
The  sects  that  the  self-worshiping  Mäyävädés  create,  by  accepting  four  Vedic
statements  as  conclusive  evidence,  without  understanding  the  actual  intention  of  the
Vedas, are mundane and unauthorized.
One should reject such deviant sampradäyas and hear and chant the glories of Lord
Hari.  One  should  understand  that  engagement  in  such  hearing  and  chanting  is  the
ultimate conclusion of the Vedas. By hearing and chanting the glories of the Lord, one
becomes firmly situated in devotional service so that one renounces whatever is not in
relation to Kåñëa, knowing that he has already attained that which leaves nothing further
to be gained. Rather than becoming a servant of the objects of sense gratification that
are produced by the interactions of the three modes of material nature, by acceptance
of  subordination  to  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  who  is  the  embodiment  of
unlimited transcendental qualities, one certainly attains all good fortune. By faithfully
hearing and chanting the glories of the Lord, which is the best form of worship, one is
freed from the results of fruitive activities, and the ultimate goal of life is achieved.
Religious rituals prescribed in the karma käëòa sections of the Vedas are distinct
from  the  favorable  cultivation  of  Kåñëa  consciousness.  Being  deceived  by  the  flowery
words  of  the  karma  käëòa,  foolish  people  uselessly  spend  their  lives  trying  to  enjoy
the  fruits  of  their  activities.  However,  when  such  unfortunate  persons  associate  with
devotees and hear their divine instructions, their desire for enjoying the fruits of their
actions can become purified if they offer the results of their work in the service of the
eternally blissful Personality of Godhead.
yathopaçrayamäëasya bhagavantaà vibhävasum
çétaà bhayaà tamo ‘pyeti sädhün saàsevatas tathä
Just as cold, fear, and darkness are eradicated as soon as one approaches the sacrificial
fire, so fear and ignorance are dispelled when one is engaged in serving the devotees of
the Lord.
COMMENTARY
Those who approach a blazing fire are surely relieved of cold, fear of the unknown,
and darkness. Similarly, attachment to fruitive activities, fear of material existence, and
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
652 Chapter 20
obstacles on the path of spiritual life are destroyed when one engages in the service of
saintly devotees, who aspire to attain the perfection of spiritual life.
PURPORT
Just as by approaching a fire, one is relieved of cold, darkness is dissipated, and fear
of  wild  animals  lurking  in  the  dark  is  removed,  simply  by  taking  shelter  of  the  lotus
feet of those who are engaged in the favorable cultivation of Kåñëa consciousness, one
becomes relieved of his engagement in fruitive activities and mental speculation. The
association  of  devotees  is  very  powerful,  like  a  blazing  fire,  and  it  frees  one  from  all
undesirable qualities, which are based on enviousness.
nimajjyonmajjatäà ghore bhaväbdhau paramäyaëam
santo brahma-vidaù çäntä naur dåòheväpsu majjatäm
The  devotees  of  the  Lord,  who  are  fixed  in  absolute  knowledge,  are  the  only  real
shelter for those who are repeatedly rising and falling within the fearful ocean of material
existence. Such devotees are just like a strong boat that comes to rescue persons who are
floundering within the sea.
COMMENTARY
The devotees are the safest shelter for those who are traversing the path of material
existence, accepting lower and higher forms of bodies, one after another.
PURPORT
The  association  of  devotees,  wherein  one  hears  about  one’s  relationship  with  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and then renders service to the Supreme Lord, gives
shelter to the fallen conditioned souls, who are drowning in the ocean of material existence,
just as a boat rescues persons who are drowning in the sea. The bodily conception of life
submerges the conditioned souls deep into the ocean of material existence. Sometimes,
by performing pious activities, one is brought to the surface so that he gains momentary
relief, but once again, when the fruits of such actions are exhausted, he is pushed down
within the water once again. Only if the conditioned souls are placed within the boat of
the association of devotees can their threefold material miseries become mitigated.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Aila-gétä
annaà hi präëinäà präëa ärtänäà çaraëaà tv aham
dharmo vittaà nåëäà pretya santo ‘rväg bibhyato ‘raëam
Just as food grains are the life of all living entities, just as I am the shelter of those
who  are  distressed,  and  just  as  religion  is  the  wealth  of  those  who  are  on  the  verge
of  death,  My  devotees  are  the  only  shelter  for  those  who  are  fearful  of    falling  into  a
miserable condition of life.
COMMENTARY
All living entities subsist on food grains. Without grains, one could not maintain
his body in a healthy condition. In the same way, for those who desire to advance in the
devotional service of the Lord, saintly devotees are their only support because without
the association of advanced devotees, one cannot attain perfection in devotional service.
Just as the Supreme Lord is the ultimate shelter of all kinds of distressed people, pure
devotees are the only shelter for those who desire to advance in devotional service. Just
as religion is the only savior from the punishment of Yamaräja, the devotees are the only
shelter for those who are trying to traverse the path of spiritual life, and are afraid of
falling down into an abominable condition of life due to uncontrolled lust, anger, and
greed.
PURPORT
Just as food grains are the shelter for the hungry, and a policeman is the refuge for
one who is being attacked, saintly devotees who are devoid of envy protect those living
entities who are frightened of the fearful conditions of material existence.
santo diçanti cakñüàsi bahir arkaù samutthitaù
devatä bändhaväù santaù santa ätmäham eva ca
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
654 Chapter 20
My devotees can award one transcendental vision, whereas the sun only enables the
gross eyes to function, and only after rising in the morning. My devotees are one’s real
worshipable  lords  and  well-wishers.  They  are  as  good  as  one’s  self,  being  non-different
from Me.
COMMENTARY
Pure devotees are just like eyes by which one can see God, because they impart to
one  the  nine  processes  of  devotional  service.  The  physical  eyes  have  no  power  to  see
without the presence of the sun. Similarly, pure devotees are like the rising sun in that
they  enable  one  to  perceive  the  light  of  transcendental  knowledge.  Pure  devotees  are
the actual demigods for those who are traveling the path of devotional service, and not
Indra and his followers. Devotees are therefore one’s real relatives and well-wishers, and
not  one’s  father,  mother,  and  paternal  or  maternal  uncles.  Devotees  are  one’s  real  life
and soul, and not one’s material body. Saintly devotees are one’s real worshipable Lord.
Without them, the Supreme Personality of Godhead will not appear in His form as the
Deity.
PURPORT
Sinful persons take great pleasure in nonsensical activities, being satisfied to remain
in the darkness of ignorance, just like animals. The devotees of the Lord are like the sun
because their enlightening instructions awaken the transcendental senses of the people
in general, so that the darkness of ignorance is dissipated. Thus it is concluded that the
Lord’s devotees are one’s real well-wishing friends, and so they are the proper recipients
of one’s service, and not the material senses, which are never satisfied. Saintly devotees
are those who have firmly accepted the path of devotional service. Non-devotees cannot
rightfully be termed friends or saintly.
vaitasenas tato ‘py evam urvaçyä loka-niñpåhaù
mukta-saìgo mahém etäm ätmärämaç cacära ha
Thus losing all desire to live on the same planet as Urvaçé, King Purüravä began to
travel over the earth, free from material desires and thus satisfied in the self.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
The Aila-gétä
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Lord thus concludes this chapter by saying that King Pururavä, the
son  of  Sudyumna,  as  mentioned  in  the  Ninth  Canto  of  the  Çrémad-Bhägavatam,  left
the  planet  of  Urvaçé  and  began  to  travel  over  the  earth,  being  free  from  all  material
connection.
PURPORT
Even  if  one  possesses  a  material  body,  if  he  is  in  the  association  of  liberated
devotees in this world, he will not be disturbed by desires for material enjoyment or dry
renunciation if he strictly follows their instructions. Until the entire world is understood
as a manifestation of the energy of Väsudeva, and until all activities are performed for
the satisfaction of Väsudeva, understanding that the Lord is one without a second, the
perfection of devotional service cannot be obtained. The vision of the devotees and that
of the karmés, jïänés, and anyäbhiläñés are not the same. An exalted devotee does not
see this world as a place for his personal enjoyment, nor does he consider the objects of
this world as meant for his sense gratification. He knows that everyone is a member of
Kåñëa’s family and thus sees everyone to be always situated in the service of the Supreme
Lord.  His  eyes,  ears,  nose,  tongue,  sense  of  touch,  and  mind,  do  not  deviate  from  the
service of the master of the senses. In this way, there is a great difference between the
conditioned  souls  and  the  liberated  or  self-realized  souls.  The  former  are  servants  of
their restless mind and beggars of material happiness and wealth, whereas the latter are
those who have attained perfection of life.
Thus end the translation of the twentieth chapter of the Uddhava-géta entitled “The
Aila-gétä” with the commentaries of Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura and chapter
summary and purports by Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 21
Lord Kåñëa’s InstruCtIons on the ProCess of deIty worshIP
CHAPTER SUMMARY
In this chapter, the Supreme Personality of Godhead explains the process of Deity
worship.
Worshiping the Deity form of the Supreme Lord purifies the mind and awards one
satisfaction.  Indeed,  it  is  the  source  of  all  desirable  gains.  One  who  does  not  engage
himself  in  worshiping  the  Deity  will  certainly  remain  attracted  to  material  sense
gratification,  and  he  will  have  no  scope  for  giving  up  bad  association.  In  the  Sätvata
scriptures, the Supreme Lord has given instructions on the process of worshiping Him
as the Deity. Brahmä, Çiva, Närada, Vyäsa, and all other sages have recommended this
process as being most beneficial for the members of all varëas and äçramas, including
women and çüdras.
There are three varieties of arcana, or Deity worship, based on either the original
Vedas, the secondary tantras, or a combination of these. The Deity form, the ground,
fire, the sun, water, and the heart of the worshiper are all places where the Deity can be
present. The Deity that is to be worshiped may be made of any one of eight substances—
stone, wood, metal, clay, paint, sand (drawn upon the ground), the mind, or jewels. These
categories are further subdivided into two: temporary and permanent.
The details of the worshiping process are as follows: The devotee should bathe, both
physically and by chanting mantras, and then utter the Gäyatré mantra at the prescribed
junctures of the day. He should arrange a seat, facing either east or north, or else directly
facing the Deity, and should bathe the Deity. He should then decorate the Deity with
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
658 Chapter 21
clothing  and  ornaments,  sprinkle  water  on  the  vessels  and  other  paraphernalia  to  be
used for the worship, and offer water for bathing the Deity’s lotus feet, arghya, water for
washing His mouth, fragrant oils, incense, lamps, flowers, and food preparations. After
this, one should worship the Lord’s personal servants and bodyguards, His consort, His
energies,  and  the  spiritual  masters,  by  chanting  their  respective  müla-mantras.  The
worshiper should recite prayers from the Puräëas and other scriptures, offer obeisances
by falling flat onto the ground, beg for the Lord’s benediction, and accept the remnants
of the Lord’s flower garlands.
Included in this method of Deity worship are the proper installation of the Deity
and  the  construction  of  a  temple,  and  also  the  conducting  of  processions  and  other
festivals. By worshiping Lord Çré Hari with unconditional devotion in this manner, one
is sure to advance toward pure loving service to His lotus feet. But if one steals things
that had been given for the service of the Deity, or the brähmaëas, whether given by
himself or by others, he will have to take his next birth as a stool-eating worm.
´Î3{H 3HÌ=
çré-uddhava uväca
kriyä-yogaà samäcakñva bhavad-ärädhanaà prabho
yasmät tväà ye yathärcanti sätvatäù sätvatarñabha
Çré Uddhava said: O Lord, please describe the procedures for worshiping You in Your
form as the Deity in the temple. What qualifications must a devotee possess to worship
You in this way, and what are the rules and regulations to be observed?
COMMENTARY
In this chapter, Lord Çré Kåñëa gives instructions to Uddhava about the principles
of Deity worship, its ingredients, the various Deity forms, and the rules and regulations
that are to be observed by the worshipers. The Lord had previously said: “It is very rare
to find one who is attached to his wife and children that is trying to cultivate devotional
service  in  the  association  of  saintly  persons.”  With  this  in  mind,  Uddhava  inquired
about Deity worship, as prescribed in the Vedic literature.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Instructions on the Process of Deity Worship
etad vadanti munayo muhur niùçreyasaà nåëäm
närado bhagavän vyäsa äcäryo ‘ìgirasaù sutaù
All  the  great  sages,  such  as  Närada  Muni,  Vyäsadeva,  and  Båhaspati,  the  spiritual
master of the demigods, have declared that such worship is supremely beneficial for all
members of human society.
TEXTS 3-4
niùsåtaà te mukhämbhojäd yad äha bhagavän ajaù
putrebhyo bhågu-mukhyebhyo devyai ca bhagavän bhavaù
etad vai sarva-varëänäm äçramäëäà ca sammatam
çreyasäm uttamaà manye stré-çüdräëäà ca mäna-da
O most magnanimous Lord, You first gave instructions on the process of Deity worship
to Lord Brahmä. Then, they were passed on by him to his sons, headed by Bhågu, and
Lord Çiva instructed his wife, Pärvaté. Therefore, I consider that worship of You in Your
form  as  the  Deity  is  the  best  spiritual  practice  for  the  members  of  all  the  varëas  and
äçramas, even for women and çudras.
COMMENTARY
The  glories  of  worshiping  the  Deity  form  of  the  Supreme  Lord  is  herein  being
described.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
660 Chapter 21
etat kamala-paträkña karma-bandha-vimocanam
bhaktäya cänuraktäya brühi viçveçvareçvara
O lotus-eyed one, O Lord of the demigods, please explain to me, Your surrendered
servant,  this  process  by  which  one  can  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  material
existence.
COMMENTARY
The  Lord  might  question  Uddhava:  “You  are  My  surrendered  devotee  and  are
attached to Me in love and so, what is the need for your knowning about Deity worship?”
Uddhava might answer: “I am concerned for the welfare of all living entities. Therefore,
kindly reveal the glories of this process to Your surrendered servant.”
PURPORT
When  one  engages  in  the  service  of  the  Lord,  renouncing  all  sense  of  false
proprietorship,  if  one  acts  without  desiring  to  enjoy  the  fruits  of  his  work,  he  is  to  be
considered a pure devotee. However, as long as one remains within this world, embodied
by gross and subtle coverings, one’s nature born of the interactions of the three modes of
material nature remains prominent. In the material condition of life, which is temporary,
full  of  ignorance,  and  thoroughly  miserable,  one  considers  himself  to  be  the  doer  of
all activities, being bound by his false ego. Only by receiving instructions from a pure
devotee of the Lord can one give up the materialistic conception of life. When, under
the  instruction  of  the  spiritual  master,  one  dovetails  his  designated  existence  in  the
service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is one without a second, the false
conception of being the enjoyer of nature gradually diminishes.
In order to gain relief from the materialistic conception of life, which consists of the
knower of matter, material knowledge, and the object of material knowledge, one must
engage in the service of the Supreme Lord. When non-devotees, who are fully absorbed
in the mundane conception of life, become inclined toward the service of the Supreme
Lord  and  His  devotees  then,  as  they  surrender  unto  the  Supreme  Lord  and  His  dear
devotees, they can realize the transcendental nature of devotional service.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Instructions on the Process of Deity Worship
çré-bhagavän uväca
na hy anto ‘nanta-pärasya karma-käëòasya coddhava
saìkñiptaà varëayiñyämi yathävad anupürvaçaù
The Supreme Lord said: My dear Uddhava, the procedures prescribe in the karma-
käëòa sections of the Vedic literature are innumerable, and so I shall explain this subject
to you briefly, from the beginning.
COMMENTARY
There  are  innumerable  Vedic  methods  of  worship,  or  arcane,  prescribed  in  the
karma käëòa sections of the Vedas.
PURPORT
All  religious  ritualistic  activities  and  worldly  activities  that  are  performed  with
the  aim  of  attaining  material  enjoyment  or  dry  renunciation  must  be  considered  as
perishable activities. In this material world, there are countless methods employed for
sense gratification and renunciation. Similarly, in the spiritual world of Vaikuëöha, there
are an unlimited variety of pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There are
innumerable prescriptions given in the karma-käëòa sections of the Vedas, dealing with
material enjoyment and renunciation.
vaidikas täntriko miçra iti me tri-vidho makhaù
trayäëäm épsitenaiva vidhinä mäà samarcaret
There  are  three  methods  for  worshiping  Me—Vedic,  Täntrika,  and  mixed.  One
should  select  the  method  that  is  suited  for  him  and  then  worship  Me  according  to  the
prescribed rules and regulations.
COMMENTARY
The Vedic method of worshiping the Supreme Lord is by chanting the prescribed
mantras. The täntrika method of worshiping the Supreme Lord is by reciting the mantras,
such as the eighteen-syllable mantra, that are given in literature such as the Gautamiya-
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
662 Chapter 21
tantra. Utilization of both literatures is the mixed way of worshiping the Supreme Lord.
One should choose the method that is suitable for one’s condition of life.
PURPORT
There are three methods of performing sacrifice. Materialistic people are generally
unwilling  to  perform  sacrifice  because  of  their  duplicitous  nature  and  their  strong
desire  to  enjoy  material  happiness.  Sacrifice  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  Supreme  Lord
is performed according to the Vedic injunctions, or those prescribed in the Päïcarätra.
The Vedic, Päïcarätrika, and a combination of both, are the three methods to properly
worship the Supreme Lord.
yadä sva-nigamenoktaà dvijatvaà präpya püruñaù
yathä yajeta mäà bhaktyä çraddhayä tan nibodha me
Now please listen faithfully as I explain to you how one who has become twice-born
by observing the relevant Vedic prescriptions should worship Me with devotion.
COMMENTARY
There  are  particular  Vedic  injunctions  relevant  to  one’s  social  and  occupational
status. Members of the brähmaëa, kñatriya and vaiçya communities achieve the status
of twice-born by initiation into the Gäyatré mantra. In this chapter, the Supreme Lord
explains how such a person should worship Him with faith and devotion.
PURPORT
Vedic scriptures are divided into two categories—ekäyana and bahvayana. One must
receive initiation into the practices of one of these two categories and then faithfully
worship the Supreme Lord, which culminates in achievement of life’s ultimate goal, the
attainment of love for God.
The process of worship that is performed when one is still in the bodily conception
of  life,  considering  himself  to  be  the  enjoyer  of  this  material  world,  is  called  arcana.
Without  being  twice-born  by  undergoing  the  purificatory  rituals,  it  is  not  possible  to
worship  the  Supreme  Lord  properly.  When  one  makes  such  an  attempt,  the  result  is
that  he  either  remains  a  sense  enjoyer  or  becomes  a  dry  renunciate  after  giving  up
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Instructions on the Process of Deity Worship
such worship. Those who observe the Vedic purificatory processes, or the Päïcarätrika
purificatory  processes,  undergo  second  birth  in  the  ekäyana  category.  One  cannot
become twice-born if he is blinded by intense desires for material enjoyment. Therefore,
it  is  essential  for  one  to  undergo  second  birth  by  following  the  prescribed  rules  and
regulations of the Vedic literature.
There  are  three  types  of  birth—çaukra,  or  seminal;  sävitrya,  or  becoming  twice-
born;  and  daikça,  or  spiritual  initiation.  The  material  body,  which  is  produced  by
the  combined  effort  of  the  father  and  mother  can  be  sanctified  by  undergoing  the
appropriate purificatory rituals. In this way, one becomes eligible to rise to the platform
of transcendental bliss. False ego, which checks the flow of transcendental happiness,
and which is born of ignorance, is indicative of a seminal birth. Devotional service is
awakened  within  the  heart  only  after  one  takes  initiation  from  a  bona  fide  spiritual
master.
The  object  of  worship,  pure  devotional  service,  and  unalloyed  devotees—these
three exist eternally in a state of full knowledge and bliss, and such a condition becomes
manifest when one develops firm faith in the instructions of the spiritual master. It is
at  this  point  that  one  can  begin  the  process  of  worship  as  described  in  this  chapter.
The  Vedic  saàskäras  are  considered  complete  when  one  undergoes  the  Päïcarätrika
saàskäras. Otherwise, simply by performing the rituals of the karma-käëòa sections of
the Vedas, one cannot rise above the influence of the three modes of material nature.
arcäyäà sthaëòile ‘gnau vä sürye väpsu hådi dvijaù
dravyeëa bhakti-yukto ‘rcet sva-guruà mäm amäyayä
A twice-born person should sincerely worship Me, his worshipable Lord, by offering
appropriate paraphernalia in loving devotion to My Deity form, or to My form appearing
upon the ground, in fire, in the sun, in water, or within his heart.
COMMENTARY
The word arcä refers to the Deity of the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
When  the  eternal  soul  misuses  his  minute  independence,  he  is  placed  within
the  material  nature  and  accepts  temporary  material  bodies,  one  after  another.  The
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
664 Chapter 21
Absolute  Truth  possesses  two  principles—aparä  prakåti  and  parä  prakåti.  The  aparä
prakåti  manifests  the  visible  universe  with  five  gross  material  elements.  The  three
modes of material nature engage the living entities in activities of the gross and subtle
bodies and by covering their knowledge, keep them far from the parä prakåti. Without
understanding of the characteristics of the Lord’s superior nature, the conditioned souls
reside in the material world as sense enjoyers or false renunciates. It is only by the mercy
of the Supreme Lord or His pure devotee that a conditioned soul can understand how
he is being manipulated by the three material modes, and that only the Supreme Lord
has the ability to liberate him from the clutches of the material nature. With such an
understanding,  one  realizes  the  complete  futility  of  trying  to  become  liberated  from
the insurmountable material energy by relying upon one’s limited senses and polluted
mind.
The  spiritual  master  also  belongs  to  the  marginal  potency  of  the  Supreme  Lord,
but  he  is  empowered  to  deliver  the  conditioned  souls  by  engaging  them  in  devotional
service. The spiritual master is the incarnation of the Lord’s mercy and as such, he is
considered to be the external manifestation of the Supersoul. By his instructions and
personal examples, he inspires the conditioned souls to renounce their foolish endeavors
of  lording  it  over  the  material  energy  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  which  only  awards  them
varieties of miserable conditions. The spiritual master engages his disciple in the worship
of the Deity of the Lord because it is the practical way to employ their mind and senses
in devotional service.
The word arcä refers to the incarnation of the Supreme Lord’s mercy. It is one of the
five eternal manifestations of the Lord that is comprehensible for the conditioned souls.
Those  who  are  neophytes  in  devotional  service,  who  still  cling  to  the  bodily  concept
of life, can easily be purified when they are engaged in the worship of the Deity in the
temple.
A  particular  place  that  has  been  purified  by  the  chanting  of  mantras  is  called
sthandila.  Fire,  the  sun,  water,  and  the  heart  of  the  living  entity  are  also  places  for
worshiping the Supreme Lord. Although Lord Viñëu is one, He is present in different
forms. He appears as the Deity and becomes worshipable Lord for neophytes devotees.
Neophyte devotees are recommended to become attached to Deity worship. By serving
the Supreme Lord in this manner, they utilize all kinds of paraphernalia for His service,
rather than considering such things to be material, and thus meant for their enjoyment.
Gradually, while engaging in the worship of the Deity under the direction of the spiritual
master, a neophyte devotee will be elevated to the platform of madhyama adhikäré. At
this time, the devotee becomes more concerned with reviving his transcendental rasa
instead  of  cultivating  the  five  kinds  of  mundane  rasa,  knowing  the  Supreme  Lord  to
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Instructions on the Process of Deity Worship
be the reservoir of all rasa. At this level of advancement, one is fit to understand the
purport of this verse from the Padma Puräëa:
yena janma-çataiù pürvaà väsudevaù samärcitaù
tan-mukhe hari-nämäni sadä tiñöhanti bhärata
O descendant of Bharata, the holy names of Lord Viñëu are always vibrating
on the tongue of one who had previously worshiped Lord Väsudeva with faith and
devotion for hundreds of lifetimes.
One  who  is  advanced  in  devotional  service  does  not  consider  the  Lord  to  be  an
order  supplier.  Such  a  second-class  devotee  offers  his  love  to  the  Supreme  Personality
of Godhead, is a sincere friend to all the devotees of the Lord, shows mercy to ignorant
people  who  are  innocent,  and  disregards  those  who  are  envious  of  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
As the devotee makes advancement in devotional service, he can come to realize
that  the  mantras  he  is  chanting  are  not  like  the  mundane  vibrations  of  this  material
world.  When  his  absorption  in  devotional  service  becomes  complete,  so  that  there
no  longer  remains  any  scope  for  his  engagement  in  sense  gratification,  the  devotee
comes to the platform of first-class devotional service as a mahä-bhägavata. Becoming
thus liberated from the clutches of the Lord’s external energy, the devotee realizes his
original constitutional relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, which is
paramount to seeing the Lord face-to-face.
The  spiritual  master  is  on  the  same  platform  as  the  Supreme  Lord,  who  is  the
maintainer  of  the  universe  and  the  destroyer  of  the  conditioned  soul’s  false  spirit  of
enjoyment.  Being  one  in  interest  with  the  Lord,  the  spiritual  master  is  known  as  the
dearest servant of the Lord. Enviousness will surely arise within the heart of a person
who considers the spiritual master to be a mortal human being. If such a misconception
is not indulged in, however, by the mercy of the Lord, one will perceive how the spiritual
master is non-different from the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
pürvaà snänaà prakurvéta dhauta-danto ‘ìga-çuddhaye
ubhayair api ca snänaà mantrair måd-grahaëädinä
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
666 Chapter 21
First,  one  should  clean  his  teeth  and  bathe.  Then  a  second  cleansing  of  the  body
should be performed by by smearing it with earth and chanting mantras from both the
Vedas and tantras.
COMMENTARY
One can also bathe by chanting Vedic and täntrika mantras.
PURPORT
By the recitation of prescribed mantras, the contamination of considering oneself to
be the enjoyer of nature can be purified.
sandhyopästyädi-karmäëi vedenäcoditäni me
püjäà taiù kalpayet samyak-saìkalpaù karma-pävaném
Concentrating  the  mind  on  Me,  one  should  worship  Me  by  the  performance  of
his  prescribed  duties,  such  as  chanting  the  Gäyatrémantra  three  times  a  day.  Such
performances are enjoined by the Vedas and they purify the worshiper of all reactions of
karma.
COMMENTARY
One should engage in the worship of the Supreme Lord by following the rules and
regulations enjoined by the scriptures. This will purify one’s existence and free one from
the bondage of fruitive activities.
PURPORT
After completing one’s prescribed duties, such as the chanting of mantras, which are
enjoined by the Vedas, one should engage in the worship of the Supreme Lord. As soon
as one abandons the materialistic propensity for sense enjoyment by strengthening his
resolve to worship Lord Hari, one becomes freed from the bondage of karma.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Instructions on the Process of Deity Worship
çailé däru-mayé lauhé lepyä lekhyä ca saikaté
mano-mayé maëi-mayé pratimäñöa-vidhä småtä
The  Deity  form  of  the  Lord  appears  in  eight  varieties—stone,  wood,  metal,  earth,
paint, sand, the mind, and jewels. This is the verdict of the scriptures.
COMMENTARY
The different kinds of Deities are being described in this verse. The word çaili means
“a Deity made of stone,” the word lauhi indicates “a Deity made of metal,” such as gold.
PURPORT
Actual  worship  of  the  Supreme  Lord  begins  when  one  gives  up  all  attempts  at
mental  speculation,  on  the  strength  of  the  transcendental  instructions  received  from
the spiritual master, and thus renounces the materialistic conception that the Supreme
Lord is the object of one’s enjoyment. For the benefit of such a devotee, the Lord appears
in eight varieties of forms. The Supreme Lord is always prepared to fulfill the desires of
His devotees, as long as they will not cause him to fall into a miserable condition of life.
It is only for the benefit of neophyte devotees that the Lord appears in these eight forms.
However, one should never make the mistake of considering the Deity of the Lord to be
made of material elements, such as marble or brass. Such a mentality is certainly suitable
for placing one on the path to hell. Unless one receives initiation from a spiritual master
coming in disciplic succession, it is not possible to understand the transcendental nature
of Lord Väsudeva and for that reason, the eight kinds of Deities may appear mundane
to the imperfect senses of the conditioned soul. Such a misunderstanding is indicative
of the ignorance that is caused by the controlling power of Maya.
caläcaleti dvi-vidhä pratiñöhä jéva-mandiram
udväsävähane na staù sthiräyäm uddhavärcane
My dear Uddhava, The Deity form of the Lord, who is the shelter of all living entities,
can be established in two ways: movable or immovable. A permanent Deity, having been
installed, can never be sent away or immersed in a body of water.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
668 Chapter 21
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Lord is directly present as the Deity. He is also present within the temple
of the living entities’ heart. Indeed, He is the shelter of all living entities. An example
of His stationary form is Lord Jagannätha in Puri and an example of His moving form is
child Kåñëa. Materialistic persons of whatever stripe consider the Lord to be their order
supplier, and so they make temporary arrangements for religious ceremonies to achieve
temporary  material  sense  gratification.  This  temporary  mode  of  worship  is  favored  by
those desiring to exploit the Personality of Godhead for their personal ends, whereas the
loving devotees in Kåñëa consciousness eternally engage in worship of the Personality of
Godhead. They install permanent Deities meant to be worshiped perpetually.
PURPORT
The  devotees  of  the  Lord  install  the  Deity  form  of  their  worshipable  Lord  in
two  different  ways—temporary  and  permanent.  However,  there  is  no  procedure  for
inviting and then immersing the permanent form of the Supreme Lord. These Deities
are  permanently  installed  and  their  worship  goes  on  perpetually.  Invoking  and  then
immersing the Deity is the practice of materialists who want to exploit the Supreme Lord
for  the  fulfillment  of  their  personal  ambitions.  The  impersonalists  regard  the  eternal
form  of  the  Lord  as  a  temporary  manifestation  created  by  the  illusory  energy,  Maya.
In fact, they regard the Deity as a mere stepping-stone in their ambitious endeavor to
become God.
asthiräyäà vikalpaù syät sthaëòile tu bhaved dvayam
snapanaà tv avilepyäyäm anyatra parimärjanam
The Deity that is temporarily established can be invited and sent away, but these two
rituals should always be performed when the Deity is traced upon the ground. The Deity
should be bathed with water except if the Deity is made of clay, paint, or wood, in which
cases a thorough cleansing without water is enjoined.
COMMENTARY
One  may  invoke  and  then  immerse  a  Deity  made  of  sand  from  a  riverbank,  or
painted, as desired. However, the çälagräma-çélä should never be immersed. Invocation
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Instructions on the Process of Deity Worship
and immersion is recommended for Deities made of earth or clay, as well as sand. Except
for paintings of the Lord, and Deities made of clay or sandalwood, all the other Deities
should be bathed with water. The Deities of clay or wood should be carefully cleansed
without the use of water.
PURPORT
There is no need for one to waste so many ingredients for worship if he considers
the Deity of Lord Viñëu to be made of stone. The Deities that are painted or made from
clay  should  not  be  bathed  with  water.  Wiping  with  a  dry  cloth  to  remove  the  dust  is
sufficient.
dravyaiù prasiddhair mad-yägaù pratimädiñv amäyinaù
bhaktasya ca yathä-labdhair hådi bhävena caiva hi
One should worship Me in My Deity form by offering the most excellent paraphernalia.
But,  an  unalloyed  devotee,  who  is  free  from  material  desires,  can  worship  Me  with
whatever is easily obtainable, or even within the mind.
COMMENTARY
If one has an abundance of wealth, he should worship the Deity with offerings of
the most excellent ingredients, such as sugar candy, ghee, sandalwood paste, kuìkuma,
and so forth. However, an impoverished devotee can worship the Deity with whatever
he  may  have  in  his  possession,  offering  it  with  love  and  devotion.  He  may  even  offer
sweet rice or fried rice within his mind, if he has nothing suitable to offer to the Lord.
PURPORT
A neophyte, or materialistic devotee who is filled with material desires, simply dreams
of gaining the opportunity of gratifying his senses. Such a devotee may simply think of
the Lord as His benefactor, without understanding his actual position as eternal servitor
of the Lord. On the other hand, an advanced devotee knows that the Deity is identical
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and so all the ingredients for worship that he
offers  are  actually  properly  utilized.  The  internal  mood  of  a  devotee  is  the  principal
ingredient of his worship.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
670 Chapter 21
snänälaìkaraëaà preñöham arcäyäm eva tüddhava
sthaëòile tattva-vinyäso vahnäv äjya-plutaà haviù
sürye cäbhyarhaëaà preñöhaà salile salilädibhiù
çraddhayopähåtaà preñöhaà bhaktena mama väry api
My dear Uddhava, while worshiping the Deity, bathing and decorating with beautiful
clothes, ornaments, and flowers are the most pleasing offerings. When the Deity is drawn
on  a  sanctified  surface,  the  offering  of  tattva-vinyäsa  is  most  important.  Oblations  of
sesame seeds and barley soaked in ghee are the best oblations poured into the sacrificial
fire.  Worship  consisting  of  upasthäna  and  arghya  is  the  best  worship  of  the  sun.  One
should  worship  Me  in  the  form  of  water  by  offerings  of  water.  Whatever  My  devotee
offers to Me, even if it is just a little water, is most dear to Me.
COMMENTARY
The Lord should be invoked and established on sanctified ground by the chanting
of mantras. One should worship the Lord in fire by offerings of sesame seeds and barley
mixed in ghee poured into the sacrificial fire. One should worship the Lord in the sun
by offering arghya. To worship the form of the Lord in water, one should simply offer
water.
PURPORT
A  neophyte  devotee  should  offer  opulent  paraphernalia  to  the  Deity  so  that  he
may constantly remember that the Supreme Lord is the supreme enjoyer and that he,
the neophyte, is meant for the Deity’s pleasure. An advanced devotee can worship the
Lord with whatever he has in his possession, offered with love and devotion. One who
makes a show of great pomp while performing ritualistic worship but displays miserliness
while collecting the ingredients of worship diminishes his propensity for service to the
Lord. Bathing the Deity on a mirror, decorating the Deity with ornaments, performing
appropriate  rituals  on  the  ground,  offering  oblations  into  the  sacrificial  fire,  offering
arghya  to  the  sun,  and  worshiping  the  puruña  incarnation  who  lies  in  the  water,  are
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Instructions on the Process of Deity Worship
herein recommended. Whatever a devotee offers to the Deity with faith and devotion
satisfies the Supreme Lord, whereas even abundance of wealth offered without faith by
non-devotees fails to attract the attention of the Lord.
bhüry apy abhaktopähåtaà na me toñäya kalpate
gandho dhüpaù sumanaso dépo ‘nnädyaà ca kià punaù
I  do  not  accept  even  the  most  opulent  offerings  if  they  are  given  by  non-devotees,
but I am very pleased to accept even the most insignificant thing offered with love by the
hand of My devotee. I am certainly most pleased when nice fragrant oil, incense, flowers,
and palatable foods are offered to Me with love.
COMMENTARY
The word sumanaso refers to the flower known as sumanasa.
çuciù sambhåta-sambhäraù präg-darbhaiù kalpitäsanaù
äsénaù präg udag värced arcäyäà tv atha sammukhaù
After purifying himself and collecting all the paraphernalia for worship, one should
sit down on a mat of kuça grass, facing either east or north. If the Deity is permanently
installed, the worshiper should sit facing the Deity.
COMMENTARY
Now, the beginning of the process of Deity worship is being described. One should
first purify himself and then sit down facing either east or north, or one who worships
an immovable Deity, he should sit directly in front of the Deity.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
672 Chapter 21
kåta-nyäsaù kåta-nyäsäà mad-arcäà päëinämåjet
kalaçaà prokñaëéyaà ca yathävad upasädhayet
Thereafter,  the  devotee  should  perform  the  ritual  known  as  nyäsa  (the  process  of
purifying oneself by touching the various parts of the body while chanting mantras) on
his own body, and on that of the Deity. He should then take from the Deity the remnants
of  previous  offerings,  such  as  flowers  and  flower  garlands.  He  should  then  prepare  a
pitcher of water for cleansing the Deity.
COMMENTARY
Before beginning one’s worship of the Deity, one should take permission from the
spiritual  master  by  offering  him  obeisances.  Then,  according  to  his  instructions,  one
should perform aìga-nyäsa on his own body, perform nyäsa on the body of the Deity
while chanting the mülä mantras, and cleanse the altar and the Deity by removing the
previously-offered flowers and so on. One should keep a pot of water for sprinkling, and
one should then decorate the Deity with flowers, and so forth.
tad-adbhir deva-yajanaà dravyäëy ätmänam eva ca
prokñya päträëi tréëy adbhis tais tair dravyaiç ca sädhayet
He  should  then  sprinkle  the  water  of  that  vessel  on  the  place  of  worship,  the
paraphernalia for worship, and his own body. Next, he should decorate three pitchers of
water with sandalwood paste and flowers, which will be used for offering pädya to the
Deity.
COMMENTARY
Next,  one  should  sprinkle  the  purified  water  on  the  place  of  worship  and  the
ingredients for worship. In the container of pädya, one should place water, black dürvä
grass, lotus petals, and an aparajitä flower. In the container of arghya, there should be
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Instructions on the Process of Deity Worship
eight  items—sandalwood  paste,  flowers,  ätapa,  rice,  barley,  tips  of  kuça  grass,  sesame
seeds, mustard seeds, and dürvä grass. In the container of äcamaniya, there should be
three items—nutmeg, clove, and kakkola.
pädyärghyäcamanéyärthaà tréëi päträëi deçikaù
hådä çérñëätha çikhayä gäyatryä cäbhimantrayet
Next,  the  worshiper  should  purify  the  three  vessels.  He  should  sanctify  the  vessel
holding water for  pädya, (washing the Lord’s lotus feet) by chanting  hådayäya namaù,
the vessel containing water for arghya by chanting çirase svähä, and the vessel containing
water for äcamanéya (washing the Lord’s mouth) by chanting çikhäyai vañaö. The Gäyatré
mantra should also be chanted for all three vessels.
COMMENTARY
The worshiper should purify the three containers by chanting the hådaya mantra,
and so on, as well as the Gäyatri mantra.
PURPORT
After  chanting  the  Gäyatri  mantra,  the  worshiper  should  purify  the  container
of  pädya  by  chanting  hådayäya  namaù,  the  container  of  arghya  by  chanting  sirase
svähä, and the container of äcamanéya by chanting çikhayai vañaö. One should purify
the  ingredients  for  pädya,  arghya,  and  äcamanéya  by  sprinkling  water  on  them  while
remembering the Supreme Lord. The ingredients of arghya are water, milk, tips of kuça
grass, yogurt, ghee, ätapa rice, and barley, or simply barley water and yogurt, as prescribed
by the followers of the Säma Veda. Brähmaëas who follow the Säma Veda use the word
arghyaà with a “y” in the neuter gender, but the followers of the other Vedas use the
word arghyaù without the “y” and in the masculine gender.
piëòe väyv-agni-saàçuddhe håt-padma-sthäà paräà mama
aëvéà jéva-kaläà dhyäyen nädänte siddha-bhävitäm
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
674 Chapter 21
Thereafter the worshiper should dry his body with the air from his stomach, burn
his  body  with  fire,  and  then  revive  it  by  showering  nectar  from  the  moon,  which  is
situated on his forehead. He should then meditate on My subtle transcendental form of
Çré Näräyaëa, which is situated on the lotus of the heart, by the vibration of the sacred
syllable oà. This form is meditated upon by perfected sages.
COMMENTARY
Thereafter, one should dry his body with the air from the stomach, burn it with fire,
and then revive it by showering nectar from the moon, which is situated on his forehead.
In this way, one should meditate on My form as Näräyaëa, which is situated on the lotus
of the heart. The praëava, or oà, has five parts— A, U, M, the nasal bindu, and the
reverberation  (näda).  After  chanting  oà,  one  should  meditate  on  the  transcendental
form of Lord Näräyaëa. It is stated in the Vedas that the Supreme Lord Himself is the
transcendental sound vibration of the Vedas, and the ultimate goal of Vedänta.
PURPORT
This ritual is called bhutaçuddhi, or purifying oneself. Before worshiping the Lord,
one must perform bhutaçudhhi.
tayätma-bhütayä piëòe vyäpte sampüjya tan-mayaù
ävähyärcädiñu sthäpya nyastäìgaà mäà prapüjayet
When My transcendental form, which pervades his body, is perceived by the worshiper,
he should worship Me within his mind, and then externally invoke Me in the Deity with
full  concentration.  He  should  then  perform  nyäsa  on  My  transcendental  body  before
beginning his worship.
COMMENTARY
The Supersoul illuminates the entire body of the devotee, just as the light of a lamp
illuminates  a  room.  One  should  first  worship  the  Lord  mentally  and  then,  with  full
concentration, invoke the Supreme Lord within the Deity. In this way, one installs the
Deity and then performs nyäsa on his own body, as well as that of the Deity.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Instructions on the Process of Deity Worship
TEXTS 25-26
pädyopasparçärhaëädén upacärän prakalpayet
dharmädibhiç ca navabhiù kalpayitväsanaà mama
padmam añöa-dalaà tatra karëikä-kesarojjvalam
ubhäbhyäà veda-tanträbhyäà mahyaà tübhaya-siddhaye
The  worshiper  should  mentally  place  an  äsana  that  is  decorated  with  the  personified
deities  of  religion,  knowledge,  renunciation,  opulence,  and  My  nine  spiritual  energies.  He
should think of My sitting place as an effulgent lotus flower with eight petals with saffron
filaments  within  the  whorl.  Then,  following  the  regulations  of  the  Vedas  and  tantras,  he
should  offer  Me  pädya,  arghya,  äcamaëiya,  and  other  items  of  worship.  By  following  this
procedure, one is awarded material enjoyment in this life, and attains liberation after death.
COMMENTARY
What should one do before offering arghya and äcamaëiya to the Deity? One should
imagine a yogapiöha äsana for the Lord, consisting of religion, knowledge, renunciation,
and opulence, and he should mentally place it on an eight-petal lotus flower. He should
then worship the Lord by offering various paraphernalia while following the rules and
regulations laid down in the Vedas and tantras. As a result of this worship, one obtains
material enjoyment and liberation.
sudarçanaà päïcajanyaà gadäséñu-dhanur-halän
muñalaà kaustubhaà mäläà çrévatsaà cänupüjayet
One  should  then  worship,  in  order,  the  Lord’s  Sudarçana  cakra,  Päïcajanya  conch
shell,  flower  garland,  sword,  arrows,  bow,  plow,  muñala  weapon,  Kaustubha  gem,  and
Çrivatsa.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
676 Chapter 21
COMMENTARY
One should worship the Sudarçana cakra and plow that are in the Lord’s hands, the
eight weapons on the eight sides of the Lord, the Kaustubha gem around the Lord’s neck,
and the curl of hair, Çrivatsa, on His chest.
PURPORT
The name of the four-armed Lord Näräyäëa’s cakra is Sudarçana, His conch shell is
named Päïcajanya, His club is named Kaumudaké, His lotus is named Çriväsa, His bow
is  named  Çaräìga,  His  sword  is  named  Nandaka,  His  gem  around  His  neck  is  named
Kaustubha, and the curl of hair on His chest is named Çrévatsa.
nandaà sunandaà garuòaà pracaëòaà caëòaà eva ca
mahäbalaà balaà caiva kumudaà kamudekñaëam
Thereafter, one should worship the eight associates of the Lord—Nanda, Sunanda,
Pracaëda, Caëòa, Mahäbala, Bala, Kumuda, and Kumudekñaëa—in the eight directions,
and worship Garuòa in front.
durgäà vinäyakaà vyäsaà viñvakñenaà gurün surän
sve sve sthäne tv abhimukhän püjayet prokñaëädibhiù
Thereafter,  with  offerings  such  as  arghya,  one  should  worship  Durgä,  Vinäyaka,
Vyäsa, Visvaksena, the spiritual masters, and the demigods, headed by Indra. All these
personalities should be in their proper places, facing the Deity.
PURPORT
All of these personalities are the associates of Lord Näräyaëa in Vaikuëöha. One
must  worship  them  while  performing  worship  of  Lord  Näräyaëa.  This  Durgä  and
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Instructions on the Process of Deity Worship
Vinäyaka (Ganeça) are not the Durgä and Ganeça of the devi-dhäma (material world)
who award material enjoyment.
candanoçéra-karpüra-kuìkumäguru-väsitaiù
salilaiù snäpayen mantrair nityadä vibhave sati
svarëa-gharmänuväkena mahäpuruña-vidyayä
pauruñeëäpi süktena sämabhé räjanädibhiù
As opulently as his wealth permits, a worshiper should bathe the Deity daily with water
mixed with sandalwood paste, camphor, uçéra root, kuì kuma, and aguru. While bathing
the  Deity,  he  should  recite  Vedic  hymns,  such  as  the  Svarëa-gharma,  Mahäpuruña-
vidyä, Puruña-sükta, and Räjana.
COMMENTARY
One  should  worship  the  associates  of  the  Lord  in  their  respective  places,  facing
the  altar  from  the  eight  directions.  Garuòa  should  be  worship  in  front  of  the  altar,
Durgä  and  others  in  their  specified  places,  the  spiritual  masters  to  the  left,  and  the
demigods, headed by Indra, toward the east. One should worship all these personalities
by  sprinkling  purified  water  and  then  offering  arghya.  One  should  recite  the  Svarna-
gharma mantra beginning with svarnaà gharma parivedanaà, the Mahäpuruña-vidyä
mantra beginning with jitante puëòarikäkña namaste viçvabhävana, the Puruña-sukta
mantra  beginning  with  sahasra  çérñä,  and  the  Räjana  mantra  from  the  Säma  Veda.
Devotional  songs  should  also  be  sung.  The  word  ädi  also  means  mantras,  such  as  the
Rohini mantras, and these should also be chanted.
PURPORT
The Puruña-sukta mantras from the Åg Veda begin with oà sahasra çirñä puruñaù
sahasräkña sahasrapät.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
678 Chapter 21
vastropavétäbharaëa-patra-srag-gandha-lepanaiù
alaìkurvéta sa-premamad-bhakto mäà yathocitam
My devotees should then lovingly decorate Me with fine clothing, ornaments, a sacred
thread, marks of tilaka, a flower garland, a garland of tulaséleaves, sandalwood paste, and
other scented substances.
COMMENTARY
The word patra-srag refers to a garland of tulasé leaves.
pädyam äcamanéyaà ca gandhaà sumanaso ‘kñatän
dhüpa-dépopahäryäëi dadyän me çraddhayärcakaù
The  worshiper  should  faithfully  offer  Me  pädya,  arghya, äcamaëéya,  sandalwood
pulp, incense, a ghee lamp, ätapa rice, and flowers.
guòa-päyasa-sarpéàñi çañkuly-äpüpa-modakän
saàyäva-dadhi-süpäàç ca naivedyaà sati kalpayet
Within his means, the devotee should offer Me sugar candy, sweet rice, ghee, çañkulé
(rice-flour  cakes),  äpüpa  (various  sweet  cakes),  modaka  (steamed  rice-flour  dumplings
filled with sweet coconut and sugar), saàyäva (wheat cakes made with ghee and milk and
covered with sugar and spices), yogurt, vegetable soups, and other palatable food.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Instructions on the Process of Deity Worship
COMMENTARY
Preparations made with gur and sugar candy, as well as sweet rice, fried rice made
with ghee, milk cakes, sweets made with wheat flour, pancakes, and other palatable food
should be offered to the Lord if one has the capacity.
abhyaìgonmardanädarça-danta-dhäväbhiñecanam
annädya-géta-nåtyäni parvaëi syur utänv-aham
On  special  days,  such  as  Ekädaçé,  and  every  day,  if  possible,  the  Deity  should  be
massaged  with  scented  oil,  shown  a  mirror,  offered  a  eucalyptus  stick  for  brushing
His  teeth,  bathed  with  the  five  kinds  of  nectar,  offered  varieties  of  opulent  foods,  and
entertained with singing and dancing.
COMMENTARY
In  the  early  morning,  one  should  wake  up  the  Deity  and  offer  Him  a  small  twig
for  brushing  His  teeth.  One  should  then    massage  the  Deity’s  body  with  scented  oil,
remove the oil from His body by applying kuìkuma and camphor, bathe the Deity with
milk, yogurt, ghee, honey, and scented water. Thereafter, one should decorate the Deity
with fine silk clothing and valuable ornaments, apply sandalwood paste, offer a flower
garland, display a mirror, and offer incense, flowers, a ghee lamp, and äcamaëiya. Next,
one should offer four kinds of food—those that are chewed, licked, sucked, and drunk.
One  should  then  offer  scented  water,  betel  nuts,  a  flower  garland,  and  finally  ärati.
Thereafter,  one  should  arrange  a  bed  that  is  decorated  with  flowers,  place  the  Deity
upon it, and fan Him with a cämara and a peacock feather fan. One should then sing,
play  musical  instruments,  and  dance  before  the  Deity.  All  of  these  aspects  of  Deity
worship should be performed on special days, such as Ekädaçé, or if one has the means,
on a daily basis.
vidhinä vihite kuëòe mekhalä-garta-vedibhiù
agnim ädhäya paritaù samühet päëinoditam
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
680 Chapter 21
After constructing an arena as enjoined by the scriptures, utilizing a sanctified belt,
a sacrificial pit, and a raised altar, the devotee should perform a fire sacrifice. He should
ingnite the sacrificial fire with wood that he has personally collected.
COMMENTARY
Here,  the  procedure  for  worshiping  the  Lord  in  fire  is  being  described.  Three
mekhalä, each about four inches long, should be used. The depth of the pit should be
about  one  foot.  An  altar  mound  should  be  prepared  around  the  pit.  In  this  way,  one
should make preparations for performing a fire sacrifice.
paristéryätha paryukñed anvädhäya yathä-vidhi
prokñaëyäsädya dravyäëi prokñyägnau bhävayeta mäm
First, one should spread kuça grass on the ground and sprinkle water over it. Then,
one  should  perform  the  ritual  of  placing  wood  into  the  sacrificial  fire  while  chanting
the prescribed  mantras. Thereafter, one should purify all of the items to be offered as
oblations by sprinkling water upon them. After doing this, one should meditate upon Me
as being situated within the sacrificial fire.
COMMENTARY
Thereafter, the sacrificial pit should be filled and covered with dry kuça grass, and
water should be sprinkled in the four directions, beginning from the north. One should
then sit down and meditate on the Lord as the Supersoul, situated within the fire.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Instructions on the Process of Deity Worship
tapta-jämbünada-prakhyaà çaìkha-cakra-gadämbujaiù
lasac-catur-bhujaà çäntaà padma-kiïjalka-väsasam
sphurat-kiréöa-kaöaka kaöi-sütra-varäìgadam
çrévatsa-vakñasaà bhräjat-kaustubhaà vana-mälinam
dhyäyann abhyarcya därüëi haviñäbhighåtäni ca
präsyäjya-bhägäv äghärau dattvä cäjya-plutaà haviù
juhuyän müla-mantreëa ñoòaçarcävadänataù
dharmädibhyo yathä-nyäyaà mantraiù sviñöi-kåtaà budhaù
The intelligent devotee should thereafter meditate on the form of the Lord, whose
complexion  is  the  color  of  molten  gold,  whose  four  arms  are  decorated  with  the  conch
shell, disc, club, and lotus flower, and whose appearance is peaceful, and who is dressed in
garments the color of the filaments within a lotus flower. His helmet, bracelets, belt, and
ornaments decorating His arms shine brilliantly. The symbol of Çrivatsa is on His chest,
along with the Kaustubha gem, and a garland of forest flowers. Thereafter, the devotee
should worship Me by taking firewood soaked in ghee and placing it in the sacrificial fire.
He should then offer as oblations into the sacrificial fire various items soaked in ghee. He
should then offer oblations to sixteen demigods, beginning with Yamaräja, while reciting
the mantras of each deity and the sixteen-line Puruña-sükta hymn, ending each line with
sväùä. While pouring one oblation after each line of the Puruña-sükta, he should utter
the particular mantra naming each deity.
COMMENTARY
After igniting the sacrificial fire, one should place wood soaked in ghee into the fire.
One should also offer ghee and other articles, such as sesame seeds, into the sacrificial
fire  while  chanting  the  sixteen  lines  of  the  Puruña-sukta  hymn.  While  chanting  the
Puruña-sükta, one should pour ghee into the sacrificial fire and chant sväùä at the end
of each line.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
682 Chapter 21
abhyarcyätha namaskåtya pärñadebhyo balià haret
müla-mantraà japed brahma smaran näräyaëätmakam
Having thus worshiped the Lord within the sacrificial fire, the devotee should offer
his  obeisances  and  then  worship  the  Lord’s  personal  associates,  headed  by  Nanda.  He
should  then  chant  the  müla-mantra  of  the  Deity  and  meditate  on  the  Supreme  Lord,
Näräyaëa.
dattväcamanam uccheñaà viñvakñenäya kalpayet
mukha-väsaà surabhimat tämbülädyam athärhayet
Next, one should offer äcamaniya to the Deity and then offer the remnants of His
food to Viñvaksena. Thereafter, he should offer perfumed betel nuts to the Lord.
COMMENTARY
One should meditate on Lord Näräyaëa, the Supreme Brahman. One should then
chant the müla-mantra and offer the remnants of the Lord’s food to Viñvaksena. Finally,
after taking permission from the Lord and Viñvakñena, one should honor the prasäda.
This is the opinion of Çrédhara Svämé.
upagäyan gåëan nåtyan karmäëy abhinayan mama
mat-kathäù çrävayan çåëvan muhürtaà kñaëiko bhavet
Thereafter, one should hear and chant narrations about Me, perform dramas depicting
My pastimes, and sing and dance in ecstasy. In this way, the devotee should absorb himself
in the festivities.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Instructions on the Process of Deity Worship
COMMENTARY
From  time  to  time,  one  should  ecstatically  engage  in  hearing  about  the  Lord  and
glorifying Him, as well as chanting and dancing with great enthusiasm.
stavair uccävacaiù stotraiù pauräëaiù präkåtair api
stutvä praséda bhagavann iti vandeta daëòa-vat
A devotee should offer prayers from the Puräëas and other scriptures, as well prayers
composed  by  himself,  and  traditional  prayers.  He  should  pray:  “O  my  Lord,  please  be
merciful to me!” and offer his obeisances by falling flat onto the ground like a rod.
COMMENTARY
One should offer the prayers to the Lord that are found in the Puräëas, which were
spoken  long  ago  by  great  sages  and  elevated  devotees.  One  should  appeal  to  the  Lord
by praying, “My dear Lord, kindly be pleased with me.” After praying in this way, one
should bow down before the Lord with great respect.
çiro mat-pädayoù kåtvä bähubhyäà ca parasparam
prapannaà pähi mäm éça bhétaà måtyu-grahärëavät
One should place his head at the lotus feet of the Deity, catching hold of the Lord’s
lotus  feet  with  both  hands  while  praying,  “O  my  Lord,  I  am  most  fearful  of  material
existence, where birth and death take place. Please protect me, who am surrendered unto
You.” After praying in this way, one should offer his obeisances by falling flat before the
Lord.
COMMENTARY
The procedure for offering obeisances is herein being described. One should place
his head at the lotus feet of the Deity and then catch hold of the lotus feet of the Lord.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
684 Chapter 21
While  doing  so,  he  should  pray,  “O  supreme  controller,  please  protect  me,  because  I
am greatly frightened by this vast ocean of material existence.” One should not chant
mantras, perform fire sacrifice, or offer obeisances just in front of the Deity, to His left,
or within the Deity room. It is prohibited to offer obeisances while facing the Deity, or
in back of the Deity, and so one should offer obeisances by falling flat onto the ground,
keeping the Deity to one’s left. One should then join his palms while offering his prayers
of submission.
iti çeñäà mayä dattäà çirasy ädhäya sädaram
udväsayec ced udväsyaà jyotir jyotiñi tat punaù
After praying in this way, the devotee should place the remnants of My flower garland,
and so on, upon his head. If the Deity is meant to be sent away at the end of the worship,
the effulgence of the Deity’s presence should be withdrawn and placed within the lotus
of one’s heart.
COMMENTARY
After offering prayers, one should gratefully consider how the Lord has mercifully
given him the remnants of His flower garland, and so on. If the Deity is made of sand, or
other such material, and must be immersed, one should withdraw the effulgence of the
Deity’s presence and merge it within the effulgence of the lotus within one’s heart.
arcädiñu yadä yatra çraddhä mäà tatra cärcayet
sarva-bhüteñv ätmani ca sarvätmäham avasthitaù
Among My various manifestations, such as the Deity, one should worship Me in the
particular form that he has developed faith in. As the Supreme Soul of all, I exist within
all created beings, as well as separately in My original form.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Instructions on the Process of Deity Worship
COMMENTARY
The main criteria for Deity worship is faith. It is due to the faith of the worshiper that
the Supreme Lord appears within the Deity. The Lord’s appearance as the Deity is His
mercy upon the conditioned souls, who cannot perceive Him with their blunt material
senses. Those who are very materialistic are advised to meditate upon the Lord as the
universal  form.  The  Deity  form,  arcä,  is  specifically  mentioned  in  this  verse  because
Deity worship is essential for making further spiritual progress. With strong faith, when
one becomes further advanced, he can realize the presence of the Lord everywhere.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the worshipable Lord of all living entities.
As  the  Supersoul,  He  is  situated  within  the  heart  of  all  living  entities.  One  should
faithfully  worship  the  Lord  in  those  forms  in  which  he  can  feel  the  Lord’s  presence.
The Deity form of the Lord is considered one of His incarnations. The Deity attracts
the faith of His worshiper and awards him auspiciousness. Inexperienced persons may
think  that  the  Deity  is  meant  for  the  sense  gratification  of  the  worshiper,  because
superficially, the Deity is made of external substances, such as marble or brass. If one
makes a show of worshiping the Supreme Lord while considering Him an order supplier
of  one’s  sense  enjoyment,  it  is  to  be  understood  that  he  is  devoid  of  faith.  It  is  one’s
duty to faithfully serve the Deity by offering various items, to the best of one’s capacity.
One’s  faith  will  never  develop  if  he  thinks  that  the  Deity  is  different  from  the  Lord
Himself. The Supreme Lord is present within all living entities, and so the conception
that other living entities and objects are meant for our personal enjoyment will distract
one from the path of spiritual advancement. Indeed, such a materialistic conception is
an indication of one’s lack of faith in the Supreme Lord. By faithfully worshiping the
Deity,  one  can  gradually  become  freed  from  such  materialistic  conceptions.  Because
neophyte devotees, or kaniñöha adhikärés, have such a materialistic conception of life,
they  cannot  understand  the  position  of  an  advanced  devotee  and  thus  their  faith  is
limited to the Deity. While faithfully worshiping the Deity, when one realizes that the
Deity is directly the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he can understand the distinction
between the three classes of devotees—uttama, madhyama, and kaniñöha. The Supreme
Lord continuously resides within the body of a devotee who is merged in ecstatic love
and never considers a Vaiñëava according to his bodily designations.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
686 Chapter 21
evaà kriyä-yoga-pathaiù pumän vaidika-täntrikaiù
arcann ubhayataù siddhià matto vindaty abhépsitäm
By  worshiping  Me  according  to  the  various  methods  prescribed  in  the  Vedas  and
tantras, one achieves his desired perfection from Me, both in this life and the next.
COMMENTARY
The word ubhayathaù means “both in this life and the next.”
PURPORT
If one worships the Supreme Lord according to the rules and regulations prescribed
in the Vedas and Païcarätras, the Lord fulfills all of his desires. Simply by the practice
of  chanting  Vedic  and  Päïcarätrika  mantras,  one  attains  the  mercy  of  the  Supreme
Lord.
mad-arcäà sampratiñöhäpya mandiraà kärayed dåòham
puñpodyänäni ramyäëi püjä-yätrotsaväçritän
The  devotee  should  more  firmly  establish  My  Deity  worship  by  constructing  a
beautiful temple, along with flower gardens. These gardens should be set aside to provide
flowers for the daily worship of the Deity, as well as for festival occasions.
COMMENTARY
There  are  many  festivals  to  be  observed  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  Lord,  such  as
Janmastamé  and  Vasanta  Païcamé.  On  these  days,  one  should  worship  the  Supreme
Lord with special offerings and great pomp. Wealthy, pious persons should be engaged
in constructing temples and gardens for the pleasure of the Deity.
püjädénäà pravähärthaà mahä-parvasv athänv-aham
kñeträpaëa-pura-grämän dattvä mat-särñöitäm iyät
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Instructions on the Process of Deity Worship
One who offers the Deity gifts of land, shops, towns, and villages, so that the regular
worship and special festivals may continue in a grand manner, will achieve opulence equal
to My own.
COMMENTARY
Those who are rich and pious will attain incomparable merit if they donate land,
marketplaces, villages, or towns for the service of the Lord, so that His service can go on
very nicely. Indeed, such persons will attain opulence like that of the Lord Himself.
PURPORT
After installing the Deity of the Lord, one should construct a majestic temple and
arrange  for  flower  gardens,  so  that  opulent  worship,  regular  processions,  and  festivals
can  be  properly  maintained.  It  is  essential  to  hold  festivals  on  the  days  of  the  Lord’s
appearance, and so on. If one donates land, marketplace, or other assets, and constructs
residences  for  pilgrims  so  that  with  the  income  the  worship  of  the  Deity  can  be
maintained  with  great  pomp,  he  will  achieve  opulence  that  is  as  good  as  that  of  the
Supreme Lord.
pratiñöhayä särvabhaumaà sadmanä bhuvana-trayam
püjädinä brahma-lokaà tribhir mat-sämyatäm iyät
By installing the Deity of the Lord, one becomes the ruler of the entire earth. By
constructing a temple for the Lord, one becomes the ruler of the three worlds. By worshiping
and serving the Deity, one attains residence in Brahmaloka, and by performing all three,
one achieves a transcendental form like My own.
COMMENTARY
The  result  of  building  a  temple,  either  by  one’s  own  endeavor  or  with  the  help
of  others,  is  herein  described.  Those  who  arrange  for  the  installation  of  the  Deity  of
the  Lord,  the  construction  of  a  temple,  and  engage  in  the  Deity’s  worship,  attain  a
transcendental form like that of the Lord.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
688 Chapter 21
PURPORT
By installing a Deity of the Lord one becomes the ruler of the earth, by constructing a
temple one conquers the three worlds, by worshiping the Deity one achieves Brahmaloka,
and by performing all three activities one attains a transcendental form similar to that
of the Supreme Lord. Mixed devotional service has been recommended for those who
desire such exalted positions. By careful consideration of the following verse, one can
understand that it is also possible to construct a temple and worship the Deity of the
Lord without expecting anything in return.
sälokya-särñöi-sämépya-särüpyaikatvam apy uta
déyamänaà na gåhëanti vinä mat-sevanaà janäù
A  pure  devotee  does  not  accept  any  kind  of  liberation—sälokya,  särñöi,
sämépya,  särüpya  or  ekatva—even  though  they  are  offered  by  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead. (Çrémad-Bhägavatam 3.29.3)
By  worshiping  Lord  Hari  without  any  material  desire,  even  while  engaging  in
worldly activities while living within the material world, one is sure to attain the highest
destination.
mäm eva nairapekñyeëa bhakti-yogena vindati
bhakti-yogaà sa labhata evaà yaù püjayeta mäm
But one who simply engages in devotional service without consideration of receiving
anything in return, attains Me. Thus, whoever worships Me according to the process I
have described will ultimately attain pure devotional service unto Me.
COMMENTARY
One who worships the Supreme Lord without any ambition, renouncing all desires
for karma and jïäna, certainly attains the platform of loving devotional service. One
who gives wealth, land, marketplaces, and so on, for the service of the Lord, without any
expectation of reward, will surely achieve all-auspiciousness.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Lord Kåñëa’s Instructions on the Process of Deity Worship
PURPORT
The previous two verses were spoken by the Lord to attract those who are interested
in fruitive results. In this verse, the ultimate purpose of worshiping the Supreme Lord
is described. The ultimate goal is Lord Kåñëa Himself. Love for the Lord is the highest
attainment, although materialistic people cannot understand this. When one engages
in the congregational chanting of the holy names of the Lord, it should be considered
that  worship  of  the  Lord  is  perfectly  accomplished,  even  without  engaging  so  much
paraphernalia. The platform of unalloyed devotional service cannot be attained by those
who  have  a  desire  to  accumulate  wealth,  enjoy  beautiful  women,  and  gain  name  and
fame. Pleasing the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, is the actual purpose of devotional service.
yaù sva-dattäà parair dattäà hareta sura-viprayoù
våttià sa jäyate viò-bhug varñäëäm ayutäyutam
One who steals the property of the demigods or brähmaëas, whether donated by him
or someone else, will have to suffer as a worm in stool for one hundred million years.
COMMENTARY
After  describing  the  glorious  position  of  those  who  help  in  the  worship  of  the
Supreme Lord, the Lord now describes the fate of a person who steals the property of
the Lord, or the brähmaëas.
PURPORT
When one employs the things that were given for the Lord’s service for one’s personal
sense gratification, he paves his way to hell and thereafter, birth as a worm in stool.
kartuç ca särather hetor anumoditur eva ca
karmaëäà bhäginaù pretya bhüyo bhüyasi tat-phalam
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 21
uddhava-gétä
Not  only  the  performer  of  such  a  theft,  but  also  anyone  who  assists,  intigates,  or
simply approves of such an act must share the sinful reaction. According to the degree of
their participation, they must suffer proportionate consequences.
COMMENTARY
Those who help a person usurp the property of the Lord and the brähmaëas must
share the sinful reactions after death because they are directly or indirectly responsible.
Those who provide direct assistance suffer the worst consequences.
PURPORT
Those  who  utilize  money  given  to  the  Lord  for  His  worship  for  their  personal
enjoyment, or who approve of such an act, are liable to be punished by Yamaräja after
death.
Thus  end  the  translation  of  the  twenty-first  chapter  of  the  Uddhava-géta  entitled
“Lord  Kåñëa’s  Instructions  on  the  Process  of  Deity  Worship”  with  the  commentaries
of  Çréla  Viçvanätha  Cakravarté  Öhäkura  and  chapter  summary  and  purports  by  Çréla
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 22
Jïäna-yoga
CHAPTER SUMMARY
This chapter give a summary of jïäna-yoga, which had been elaborately described
in previous chapters.
Everything  within  the  cosmic  manifestation  is  a  product  of  the  three  modes  of
material nature. Although such products are perceived by the material senses, they are
illusory by nature. Similarly, the conditioned souls’ conceptions of “good” and “bad” that
are given to such products and activities within the universe are illusory. It is better to
avoid condemning or praising anyone, because this confines one to the bodily concept
of  life  and  thus  negates  superior  spiritual  understanding.  The  spirit  souls  pervade  the
entire universe and their nature is transcendental to mundane duality. By cultivating
such an understanding, one can remain detached even while in material existence.
As long as the conditioned soul desires the gratification of his material senses, the
bodily  conception  of  life  will  continue.  Although  material  existence  is  illusory,  like  a
dream, those attached to fruitive action remain entangled in the cycle of repeated birth
and  death.  All  conditions  of  material  existence,  such  as  birth,  death,  happiness,  and
distress  are  experienced  by  the  false  ego,  and  not  the  eternal  soul.  By  distinguishing
between  matter  and  spirit,  one  can  gradually  renounce  the  false  sense  of  bodily
identification.
While the material manifestation goes through stages of creation, maintenance, and
annihilation,  the  changeless  Absolute  Truth  remains  undisturbed.  While  manifested,
the universe rests in the Absolute Truth, which is all-pervading in time and space. The
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
692 Chapter 22
Absolute Truth is not transformed, but this cosmic manifestation is made possible by a
transformation of the mode of passion.
By  the  mercy  of  a  bona  fide  spiritual  master,  one  can  understand  illusory  nature
of  the  material  body,  and  thus  distinguish  the  Absolute  Truth  from  such  temporary
existence.  When  a  person  renounces  all  desires  for  sense  enjoyment,  he  can  become
satisfied in the self alone. Just as the sun is undisturbed by the movement of clouds in the
atmosphere, the liberated soul is unaffected by the activities of the material body. Still,
when one is a neophyte in the practice of the devotional service of the Lord, one should
carefully restrict his contact with the objects of the senses. Until one’s determination
becomes fixed, one may fall down as a result of obstacles placed before him on the path
of  spiritual  advancement.  Still,  there  is  no  loss  for  one  who  is  engaged  in  devotional
service,  because  in  his  next  life,  he  will  be  given  a  chance  to  continue  his  spiritual
practice from where he left off. When one is actually liberated from material existence,
he will never desire to indulge in insignificant material sense pleasures, knowing that
his eternal self is distinct from the illusory material body.
While one is on the path of spiritual realization, if one suffers from disease or other
disturbance, he should not neglect to take proper remedial measures. The best means
for  lust  and  the  other  enemies  of  the  mind  is  meditation  on  the  Supreme  Personality
of Godhead, especially by the performce of congregational chanting of the Lord’s holy
names.  The  false  ego  can  best  be  conquered  by  rendering  selfless  service  to  the  pure
devotees of the Lord.
By  the  practice  of  yoga,  materialistic  men  hope  to  keep  their  body  fit  for  sense
gratification,  up  to  the  limit  of  the  attainment  of  mystic  powers  and  an  extended
duration of life. These achievements have no lasting value, however, because they are in
relation to the material body, which is temporary. The devotees of the Lord are therefore
uninterested in attaining the mystic perfections of yoga. Instead, they are keen to take
shelter  at  the  lotus  feet  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  knowing  this  to  be
the cause of the eternal cessation of material miseries and engagement in every-blissful
engagement in devotional service.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Jï äna-yoga
çré-bhagavän uväca
para-svabhäva-karmäëi na praçaàsen na garhayet
viçvam ekämakaà paçyan prakåtyä puruñeëa ca
The  Supreme  Lord  said:  One  should  neither  praise  nor  criticize  the  nature  and
activities of others. Rather, one should understand the material world to be working as
a combination of material nature and the conditioned souls, and resting in the Absolute
Truth.
COMMENTARY
After describing different philosophical systems, Lord Çré Kåñëa now discusses the
philosophy of impersonalism, which preaches that the material creation is false.
What is this material creation? Is it factual or is it false? Does it exist or is it merely
an illusion? The answer to all these questions will be given in this chapter. Impersonal
philosophers  are  divided  into  two  categories—vivartaväda  and  pariëämaväda.  The
Supreme Lord is both the cause and effect of this universe. If the theory that that the
Absolute Truth transforms to become the material universe (pariëämaväda) is accepted,
then it would appear that the Supreme Lord is changeable. On the other hand, those who
propagate the philosophy of vivartaväda say that the Absolute Truth is unchangeable, and
that this material world is false. According to another opinion, since the material nature
is  the  energy  of  the  Absolute  Truth,  even  if  it  is  accepted  that  the  material  energy  is
subject to transformation, the Absolute Truth, being transcendental to material nature,
remains unchanged. There is no objection if the followers of pariëämaväda accept this
opinion. Indeed, this is what has been described by the Supreme Lord, who says that He
is the ingredient cause of this universe, the Supersoul, and time.
Although there is certainly a distinction between the energetic and the energy, the
Supreme Lord, despite manifesting innumerable forms, remains one without a second. Of
the two categories of impersonalists, the Supreme Lord approves the second category. In
this chapter, the Lord describes this understanding of vivartaväda and pariëämaväda.
The  word  asat  is  used  by  the  followers  of  vivartaväda  to  mean  “illusion,”  but  it  is
used by the followers of pariëämaväda to mean “temporary existence.” The vivartavädés
say that all activities are false whereas the pariëämavädés say that they are temporary.
This is the subtle difference between the two groups of impersonalists.
PURPORT
In  material  existence,  we  create  distinctions  between  one  another  due  to  bodily
designations, sometimes praising and sometimes showing disdain. Those who are trying
to  situate  themselves  on  the  transcendental  platform,  however,  should  not  indulge  in
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
694 Chapter 22
such praises and criticisms, knowing that the distinctions between the conditioned souls
are simply a creation of the interaction of the three modes of material nature. Those who
are impersonalists try to nullify the distinction between the seer, the seen, and the act
of seeing, considering the Absolute Truth to be without variegatedness. In this material
world, all varieties are manifestations of the interaction of the three modes of material
nature but in the transcendental abode of the Lord, Vaikuëöha, there is no existence
of  the  modes  of  nature.  There,  the  Lord’s  spiritual  energies  have  manifested  a  world
of spiritual variegatedness. Because of the competition of the three modes of material
nature  the  polluted  distinctions  between  superiority  and  inferiority  predominate.
Therefore,  the  material  atmosphere  is  permeated  with  praise  and  condemnation  but
in the transcendental abode of Vaikuëöha, where there is no influence of the material
energy, there are no such distinctions.
para-svabhäva-karmäëi yaù praçaàsati nindati
sa äçu bhraçyate svärthäd asaty abhiniveçataù
One who indulges in praising or criticizing others’ natures and activities will deviate
from his own best interest because of his absorption on the platform of duality.
COMMENTARY
One  who  glorifies  or  criticizes  others’  natures  and  activities  remains  absorbed  on
the  temporary,  material  platform  and  thus  becomes  forgetful  of  the  eternal,  spiritual
reality.
PURPORT
One who becomes habituated to finding fault with others instead of chanting the
glories  of  Lord  Hari  in  the  association  of  devotees  will  surely  exhibit  great  pride  in
himself while belittling others. The act of praising and criticizing others falls within the
jurisdiction of the interaction of the three modes of material nature. The conditioned
souls, being absorbed in duality, have brought about their condition of inauspiciousness.
When  one  pursues  his  actual  self-interest,  which  is  to  elevate  one  to  the  spiritual
platform, he avoids thinking of others in terms of material designations and thus refrains
from criticizing or praising others. The activities of this material world are temporary,
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Jï äna-yoga
full  of  ignorance,  and  produce  misery,  and  can  never  be  considered  constitutional  in
nature. As long as one maintains the habit of criticizing or praising others in the bodily
conception of life, he will never be elevated to the spiritual platform, having deviated
from his real self-interest.
taijase nidrayäpanne piëòa-stho nañöa-cetanaù
mäyäà präpnoti måtyuà vä tadvan nänärtha-dåk pumän
Just  as  one  loses  external  consciousness  when  his  senses,  which  are  born  of  the
räjasika ahaì kära, are overcome by the illusion of dreaming, or deathlike state of deep
sleep, so a person absorbed in material duality must experience illusion and death.
COMMENTARY
He who thinks in terms of material duality, and thus glorifies or condemns others’
natures  and  activities  is  deviated  from  his  real  self-interest.  This  verse  provides  and
example to illustrate this point. The senses are produced from false ego in the mode of
passion. When the senses are dormant as the living entity sleeps, his mind is plunged into
the illusion of dreaming. And when the mind becomes inactive, the living entity loses
all external consciousness and remains in a deathlike state of deep sleep. Similarly, one
who discriminates according to material designations covers his original consciousness,
becoming almost like inert matter.
PURPORT
Being  enthusiastically  engaged  on  the  bodily  platform,  the  conditioned  souls
remain indifferent to the service of the Lord as they continue dreaming of themselves
as lords of the material nature. Such material absorption is the result of forgetting one’s
constitutional position as the eternal part and parcel of the Supreme Lord. Although
materialistic  sense  enjoyers  endeavor  for  achieving  high  positions  within  this  world,
they ultimately meet with destruction, under the control of the laws  of nature.  Being
bewildered by false ego, although the conditioned souls are struggling hard for existence
while failing to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they become very proud
of their temporary designations, thinking themselves to be the lords of all they survey.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
696 Chapter 22
kià bhadraà kim abhadraà vä dvaitasyävastunaù kiyat
väcoditaà tad anåtaà manasä dhyätam eva ca
That which the conditioned souls express by their words or meditate upon by their
mind  is  not  ultimate  truth.  Considering  this,  what  is  actually  good  or  bad  within  this
illusory world of duality?
COMMENTARY
In these verses, the Lord elaborately describes how it is foolish to glorify or criticize
material  conditions,  because  anything  seen  as  not  related  to  the  Supreme  Lord  is  an
illusion.  The  holy  names,  forms,  abode,  and  devotees  of  the  Supreme  Lord  are  all
transcendental, and thus as good as Him. All dualities of this world—whether spoken
by material words or meditated upon by the material mind—are illusory.
The word asat means “that which has no factual existence.” So, praise and criticism of
objects that are seen to be separate from the Supreme Lord is itself an activity of illusion.
On the other hand, anything seen in relation to the Supreme Lord is to be considered
transcendental. The Supreme Lord is eternal, full of knowledge, unlimited, and full of
bliss.  He  is  the  reservoir  of  all  transcendental  pleasure.  He  has  many  transcendental
names,  such  as  Gopäla,  and  these  names  are  fully  spiritual.  Those  who  glorify  the
Supreme  Lord  are  on  the  path  to  liberation.  Even  before  the  devotee  relinquishes  his
material body, he is awarded a spiritual body by the mercy of the Lord. The abode of the
Lord is transcendental, and His associates are also transcendental. Anything that is not
in relation to the Lord is mundane, illusory, and fit to be rejected.
PURPORT
The  Absolute  Truth  is  reflected  in  the  objects  manifested  by  material  nature.
However,  one  should  know  that  a  mere  shadow  or  reflection  of  the  Absolute  Truth,
as  found  in  material  objects,  cannot  bring  about  genuine  auspiciousness.  Sometimes
the  mind  accepts  something  as  favorable  and  sometimes  it  accepts  the  same  thing  as
unfavorable. Perverted existence cannot be accepted as ultimate reality, although it may
appear similar. All actions performed in the perverted reflection of material existence,
such  as  speaking  and  meditating,  are  self-centered  in  nature,  being  nourished  by  the
false ego. Those who are absorbed in thought of temporary material objects, and those
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Jï äna-yoga
who take pleasure in discussing the temporary manifestations of matter, are averse to the
service of the Absolute Personality of Godhead, although they pose as being very expert
in discriminating between that which is seemingly good and that which is apparently
bad. When the eternal constitutional activities of the spirit soul are thus dormant, the
mind assumes the role as the master. The mind’s false ego considers itself as the enjoyer
and thus becomes subjected to happiness and distress while interacting with the sense
objects of form, taste, smell, touch, and sound, with the help of the senses. When such
sense  enjoyers  experience  frustration,  they  imagine  themselves  as  renouncing  sense
gratification while remaining engaged in propagating the philosophy of impersonalism.
While  such  people  remain  deviated  from  the  path  of  devotional  service  because  of
their  materialistic  mentality,  they  attribute  mundane  abomination  to  the  Supreme
Absolute Truth, having no understanding of the spiritual energies—hlädiné, sandhiné,
and samvit. Being impersonalists, they consider the temporary material manifestation as
false, and the eternal kingdom of God as a similar mundane existence. Those who are
conversant with the truth know that it is unreasonable to equate this temporary cosmic
manifestation with the eternal abode of the Lord.
chäyä-pratyähvayäbhäsä hy asanto ‘py artha-käriëaù
evaà dehädayo bhävä yacchanty ä-måtyuto bhayam
Although shadows, echoes, and the acceptance of a seashell as silver are only illusory
reflections of real things, such reflections do cause meaningful perception. In the same
way, although the identification of the conditioned soul with his material body and mind
is illusory, this identification creates fear within him, right up to the time of death.
COMMENTARY
If temporary material objects are not reality, then how can pots and pitchers be of
use? The answer is that, just as a shadow, echo, reflection, or the acceptance of a seashell
as silver produces an emotional response, although illusory, so material objects, although
temporary and illusory, are still considered as useful by the conditioned soul. Although
the material body is temporary and illusory, it creates fear of material existence for the
living entities, up until the time of death.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
698 Chapter 22
PURPORT
A reflection, shadow, and echo, and the mistake of accepting a seashell as silver are
illusory  existences.  Although  they  resemble  the  objects  they  imitate,  they  are  distinct
from them. The living entities’ conditional state is temporary and illusory manifestation
of reality. Non-devotees, being bereft of the service of the Lord’s lotus feet, which award
fearlessness, experience fear, illusion, lamentation, and so forth, in relation to illusory
material manifestations. Forgetfulness of one’s constitutional position makes one identify
with his gross and subtle bodies, which are temporary and thus subject to annihilation,
causing great fear and anxiety.
atmaiva tad idaà viçvaà såjyate såjati prabhuù
träyate träti viçvätmä hriyate haratéçvaraù
tasmän na hy ätmano ‘nyasmäd anyo bhävo nirüpitaù
nirüpite ‘yaà tri-vidhä nirmüla bhätir ätmani
idaà guëa-mayaà viddhi tri-vidhaà mäyayä kåtam
The Supersoul is the supreme controller and creator of this world, and thus He is also
that which is created. Thus, the Soul of all existence maintains and is also maintained,
withdraws  and  is  also  withdrawn.  No  entity  should  be  ascertained  as  being  separate
from Him, the Supreme Soul, who nonetheless remains distinct from everything. When
the  truth  has  been  ascertained  in  this  manner,  it  should  be  understood  that  the  three
conditions of material existence, ädhyätmika, adhidaivika, and adhibautika, are illusory,
being manifestations of Maya.
COMMENTARY
The  Vedas  have  ascertained  that  the  material  creation  is  a  manifestation  of  the
separated energy of the Supreme Lord. How then can it be considered false? The answer
is given here: “The Supreme Lord is both the cause and effect. Therefore, the material
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Jï äna-yoga
manifestation is not separate from Him. He maintains the entire universe in His form as
Paramätmä. Nothing seen as without relationship with the Supersoul can be accepted
as  reality.  The  three  features  of  material  existence—ädhyätmika,  adhidaivika,  and
adhibautika— are thus manifestations of illusion.” If the Supersoul is the actual form of
the universe, then from where did these three features come? The answer is herein given:
“If there is no original, then how can there be an imitation? The cosmic manifestation is
a creation of the inconceivable energy of the Lord. This is the doctrine of the followers
of pariëämaväda. The followers of vivartaväda say that these three features are illusions
born of ignorance.”
PURPORT
The  material  world  has  emanated  from  the  energy  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  it  is
maintained by Him for some time, and then it again merges within Him. The temporary
cosmic manifestation is meant for the inhabitation of those who are averse to the service
of  the  Supreme  Lord.  The  Lord  divides  the  time  factor  and  empowers  the  material
energy,  which  possesses  the  power  to  cover  the  consciousness  of  the  living  entities,
and to throw them into the darkest regions of nescience. The external energy, which
manifests the material world, has no existence separate from the Supreme Lord, whose
nature  is  eternal,  full  of  knowledge,  and  full  of  bliss.  He  is  very  dear  to  His  devotees.
The objects of the senses have been created for the enjoyment of those who have turned
their backs on the Supreme Lord. The great variety of conditions that have manifested
within  material  existence  are  designed  to  capture  the  conditioned  souls,  whose  only
engagement  is  the  gratification  of  their  senses.  The  abominable  conditions  of  birth,
death, old age, and disease are absent in the eternal abode of the Lord, Vaikuëöha, or
Goloka. Thus, there is a gulf of difference between the manifestations of the internal and
external potencies. All the objects of the material world are products of the three modes
of material nature, which are manifested from the external energy of the Lord. Just as
an echo is similar to the original sound it mirrors, the activities of the material world
bear some resemblance to those enacted in the eternal abode of the Lord. Materialistic
people generally consider the form of the Lord to be a manifestation of the modes of
material nature, and such a conception is a product of the darkness of nescience. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead is pure, transcendental existence, devoid of all kinds
of abomination that is experienced in this world. The Lord is unlimited and absolute.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
700 Chapter 22
etad vidvän mad-uditaà jïäna-vijïäna-naipuëam
na nindati na ca stauti loke carati sürya-vat
One  who  has  become  firmly  fixed  in  the  understanding  that  I  have  imparted,  and
its practical application, will not be concerned with honor or dishonor. Like the sun, he
wanders unimpeded throughout the world.
COMMENTARY
After  realizing  this  knowledge  and  its  application,  as  instructed  by  the  Supreme
Lord,  learned  devotees  treat  everyone  equally,  like  the  sun,  which  distributes  its  heat
and light to all without discrimination.
PURPORT
The  living  entities  are  eternally  parts  and  parcels  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  and  thus
they  are  by  nature  full  of  knowledge.  However,  involvement  in  mundane  activities,
which naturally involves praising and criticizing others, covers one’s pure and original
consciousness.  Just  as  a  devotee  should  not  be  attached  to  anything  material,  so  he
should  also  not  be  hateful  of  anything.  He  should  simply  accept  everything  favorable
for the service of the Lord and reject everything that is unfavorable, as directed by the
spiritual master.
pratyakñeëänumänena nigamenätma-saàvidä
ädy-antavad asaj jïätvä niùsaìgo vicared iha
By means of sensual perception, reason and logic, the evidence of the scriptures, and
one’s own understanding, one should know that this world has a beginning and an end
and  thus  has  no  ultimate  reality.  Keeping  this  always  in  mind,  one  should  live  in  this
world without attachment.
COMMENTARY
Anything  that  has  a  beginning  also  has  an  end.  Through  direct  perception,  one
can see the beginning and end of material objects, such as clay cooking pots. Through
deduction, one can conclude that there is a beginning and an end to this visible world.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Jï äna-yoga
From the Vedic statements, one can hear about the beginning and end of the material
elements, such as the sky, and by means of one’s personal realization, one can understand
that the cosmic manifestation is temporarily manifested by the Lord as a concession for
the conditioned souls, who desire material enjoyment.
PURPORT
A  self-realized  soul  can  understand  through  direct  perception,  deduction,  and
the evidence of the transcendental sound vibration, that this material world is always
changing, and has a beginning and an end. A realized soul could never accept this world
as eternally existent and unchanging, knowing it to be a transformation of the absolute
truth. Transformable nature is distinct from eternal nature. The Vedas inform us that
the cosmic manifestation is a transformation of the Lord’s illusory energy, and therefore
temporary.  Only  those  who  have  cultivated  spiritual  knowledge,  which  is  the  fruit  of
their practice of yoga and meditation, can live in this world without attachment, having
realized its temporary nature by means of direct perception, deduction, and scriptural
evidence. The word niùsaìga, however, does not indicate that such a person gives up the
association of devotees and the worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
´Î3{H 3HÌ=
çré-uddhava uväca
naivätmano na dehasya saàsåtir drañöå-dåçyayoù
anätma-sva-dåçor éça kasya syäd upalabhyate
Çré  Uddhava  said:  My  dear  Lord,  it  cannot  be  that  this  material  existence  is  the
experience of either the soul, who is the seer, or the body, which is seen. On the one hand,
the spirit soul is innately endowed with perfect knowledge, and on the other hand, the
material body is not a conscious entity. To whom, then, does this experience of material
existence pertain?
COMMENTARY
Çré  Uddhava  said:  “The  living  entity  is  a  pure  spirit  soul,  full  of  knowledge  and
bliss,  whereas  the  material  body  is  a  machine  without  consciousness.  Who  or  what  is
actually experiencing the ignorance of material existence?” The conscious experience of
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
702 Chapter 22
material life cannot be denied, and thus Uddhava asks Lord Kåñëa this question to elicit
a  more  precise  understanding  of  the  process  by  which  illusion  occurs.  Although  this
material creation is temporary, as long as it exists, who is it that experiences happiness
and distress? The material body is a product of matter and therefore inert by nature, so
that it cannot feel material happiness and distress. The spirit soul is by nature full of
knowledge. Therefore, how could he lose such constitutional knowledge” How has the
spirit soul been placed into illusion?
PURPORT
Inert matter cannot see, and the soul, being fully spiritual, has nothing to do with
matter. How then can these two have a relationship as the seer and the seen?
ätmävyayo ‘guëaù çuddhaù svayaà-jyotir anävåtaù
Agni-vad däru-vad acid dehaù kasyeha saàsåtiù
The spirit soul is transcendental, eternal, pure, self-illuminating, and unaffected by
material conditions. It is like fire, whereas the material body is dead matter, like firewood.
So, in this world, who is it that actually experiences material existence?
COMMENTARY
The  spirit  soul  is  imperishable,  transcendental,  pure,  self-illuminating,  full  of
knowledge,  and  unaffected  by  material  conditions,  being  the  superior  energy  of
the  Supreme  Lord.  In  this  verse,  the  example  of  wood  and  fire  is  given.  Fire  is  self-
illuminating and wood is illuminating only when it is associated with fire. The material
body  is  dead  matter,  like  wood,  and  the  spirit  soul  is  self-illuminating,  like  fire.  Fire
exists independently of wood and wood cannot itself illuminate. The soul exists beyond
matter and matter itself is devoid of consciousness. So, who or what actually experiences
the happiness and distress of material existence?
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Jï äna-yoga
çré-bhagavän uväca
yävad dehendriya-präëair ätmanaù sannikarñaëam
saàsäraù phalaväàs tävad apärtho ‘py avivekinaù
The  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  said:  As  long  as  the  ignorant  spirit  soul
maintains his relationship with the material body, senses, and life air, his illusory material
existence will continue to flourish, although it is actually meaningless.
COMMENTARY
Ignorance is the cause of the living entities’ bondage to material existence. This is
being  explained  in  this  and  the  following  verses.  One’s  material  existence  continues
to  flourish  as  long  as  the  soul  maintains  his  relationship  with  its  temporary  material
products.  How  does  a  living  entity  establish  a  relationship  with  a  temporary  material
body? It is simply due to ignorance.
PURPORT
As  long  as  the  spirit  soul  remains  attracted  to  his  material  body,  senses,  and  life
air,  the  material  world  appears  to  be  a  very  fruitful  place,  even  though  it  is  actually
insignificant. The cultivation of knowledge that is based upon ignorance is not factual.
Because such knowledge is based on the bodily concept of life, it is faulty and therefore
useless.
arthe hy avidyamäne ‘pi saàsåtir na nivartate
dhyäyato viñayän asya svapne ‘narthägamo yathä
The living entity is transcendental to material existence, but because of his mentality
of lording it over material nature, his material existence continues, so that, just as in a
dream, he is affected by all sorts of inconveniences.
COMMENTARY
If the material body is an illusory manifestation of the external energy of the Lord,
then  how  did  the  pure  spirit  soul  become  attached  to  it?  Even  though  the  objects  of
this material world are not factual, they continue to affect the conditioned souls. Such
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
704 Chapter 22
a  condition  is  just  like  a  dream,  wherein  the  dreaming  person  sees  many  things  that
actually have no real existence and yet, because of them, he suffers. When one becomes
frightened by seeing a snake or tiger in a dream, such  a feeling is certainly based on
illusion.
PURPORT
As a sleeping person accepts the objects seen in dreams as reality, so until one attains
the stage of self-realization, his propensity for material enjoyment will continue.
yathä hy apratibuddhasya prasväpo bahv-anartha-bhåt
sa eva pratibuddhasya na vai mohäya kalpate
While  dreaming,  a  person  may  experience  many  undesirable  things,  but  upon
awakening,  he  is  no  longer  troubled  by  such  dreams,  even  though  he  may  remember
them.
COMMENTARY
A dream produces varieties of undesirable circumstances, but after awakening, one
ceases to be troubled by them because of understanding the dream’s illusory nature.
PURPORT
A dreaming person takes his experiences to be factual, although they are illusory.
After  waking  up,  however,  one  is  no  longer  affected  by  whatever  he  might  have
experienced  in  his  dreams.  In  the  same  way,  a  self-realized  soul  can  understand  that
this  visible  world  is  illusory,  and  therefore  insignificant.  When  one  understands  the
nature  of  reality,  the  temporary  and  illusory  experiences  of  material  existence  seem
insubstantial.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Jï äna-yoga
çoka-harña-bhaya-krodha-lobha-moha-spåhädayaù
ahaìkärasya dåçyante janma-måtyuç ca nätmanaù
Lamentation,  jubilation,  fear,  anger,  greed,  delusion,  and  hankering,  and  so  on,  are
experiences of the false ego and not of the pure soul.
COMMENTARY
Feelings, such as lamentation and fear, are not experiences of the soul. Such feelings
are due to the false ego, which is the pure soul’s illusory identification with the subtle
material mind and the gross material body. A self-realized person knows that whatever
emotions  are  experienced  on  the  material  platform  have  no  relation  to  the  pure  soul,
whose eternal mood is engagement in the devotional service of the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
As  a  result  of  his  illusory  identification  with  the  gross  body  and  subtle  mind,
the  conditioned  soul  feels  lamentation  for  things  lost,  jubilation  over  things  gained,
fear  of  impending  danger,  anger  at  the  frustration  of  his  desires,  and  greed  for  sense
gratification. Being bewildered by such false attractions and aversions, the conditioned
soul must accept further material bodies, thus forcing him to undergo repeated births
and deaths. However, a self-realized soul considers all such experiences as illusory.
dehendriya-präëa-mano-’bhimäno jévo ‘ntar-ätmä guëa-karma-mürtiù
sütraà mahän ity urudheva gétaù saàsära ädhävati käla-tantraù
The conditioned soul is awarded a form according to his situation under the modes
of nature and his work, and due to ignorance, he identifies with his body and mind. In
this way, he receives material designations under the strict control of supreme time, and
is thus forced to travel within this material world.
COMMENTARY
One  might  question:  “If  lamentation,  hankering,  happiness  and  distress,  and  so
on  are  the  nature  of  the  false  ego  and  not  of  the  spirit  soul,  why  does  the  spirit  soul
accept such a nature and suffer? Why would anyone accept another’s nature and bring
about his own suffering?” In this verse, the answer is given: The living entity never acts
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
706 Chapter 22
independently.  The  conditioned  souls  have  been  enticed  by  the  false  ego  to  become
enjoyers of this material world. After accepting the false ego, the living entity runs after
material  sense  gratification,  being  influenced  by  the  three  modes  of  material  nature,
under  the  control  of  time,  which  represents  the  Supreme  Lord.  It  is  for  this  reason
that  the  living  entity  suffers  by  false  identification,  and  thus  accepts  material  bodies
repeatedly in the cycle of birth and death.
PURPORT
There are two classes of living entities—those that are eternally conditioned and
those that are eternally liberated. The eternally liberated associates of the Lord reside in
His supreme abode, Vaikuëöha, which is a manifestation of the spiritual potency. There,
the  liberated  souls  are  eternally  engaged  in  the  blissful  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord,
being situated in their original, transcendental forms. Being part and parcel of Kåñëa,
they  naturally  remain  as  if  members  of  His  family.  The  eternally  conditioned  souls
wander  about  within  this  material  world,  which  is  under  the  control  of  time.  Posing
themselves as sense enjoyers, they accept the material body and mind, so that they can
interact with the objects of the senses, and all these are transformations of the mahat-
tattva.
amülam etad bahu-rüpa-rüpitaà mano-vacaù-präëa-çaréra-karma
jïänäsinopäsanayä çitena cchittvä munir gäà vicaraty atåñëaù
Although the false ego has no factual basis in reality, it is perceived by the conditioned
soul in many forms—as the functions of the mind, speech, life air, and bodily faculties.
With  the  sharpened  sword  of  transcendental  knowledge,  received  from  the  bona  fide
spiritual master, one who is sober should cut off this false identification and live within
this world free from material attachment.
COMMENTARY
How is it possible to give up the false egoistic conception of life, which is actually
illusory?  The  false  ego  manifests  in  many  forms,  such  as  the  activities  of  the  mind,
speech,  life  air,  and  senses.  One  must  cut  off  one’s  attachment  to  the  false  ego  with
the  sharpened  weapon  of  knowledge,  which  is  received  from  the  spiritual  master,  by
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Jï äna-yoga
engagement  in  the  devotional  service  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  In  this  way,  one  can  live
within this world without attachment.
PURPORT
Sober  devotees,  who  are  not  intoxicated  by  desires  for  material  enjoyment,  live
within this world as mendicants by cutting off the illusory false ego and its products—
the body, mind, speech, and life air. The conditioned souls, who are averse to the service
of Lord Hari, misuse their valuable human form of life to become either whimsical sense
enjoyers or dry renouncers. The heart of the conditioned soul thus becomes covered by
the dust of sense gratification, or filled with the broom of renunciation. On the strength
of the association of saintly persons, and by their transcendental instructions, one can
gradually be relieved of both kinds of mundane abomination, thus losing all interest in
mundane sense gratification and impersonal liberation.
jïänaà viveko nigamas tapaç ca pratyakñam aitihyam athänumänam
ädy-antayor asya yad eva kevalaà kälaç ca hetuç ca tad eva madhye
Real spiritual knowledge is based on the discrimination between spirit and matter, and
it is cultivated by scriptural evidence, austerity, direct perception, and logical inference.
The Supreme Lord exists alone before the material creation and after its annihilation. He
is the cause of all causes and it is He who assumes the form of time. Even in the middle
period of universal maintenance, the Supreme Lord alone is the only reality.
COMMENTARY
Actual  knowledge  refers  to  that  which  is  gained  by  the  power  of  discrimination
between  matter  and  spirit.  The  means  for  cultivating  this  knowledge  are  hearing
from the Vedas, one’s own realizations, the instructions of the great sages of the past,
and  logical  inference.  Such  knowledge  culminates  in  the  realization  of  the  Supreme
Brahman,  who  alone  existed  before  the  creation  of  the  universe,  who  will  alone  exist
after the destruction of the universe, and who is the actual reality during the interim
period of universal maintenance.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
708 Chapter 22
PURPORT
Direct perception, logical deduction, historical evidence, austerity, speech, wisdom,
and time, are all situated in the Absolute Truth, who alone exists before the creation,
after the annihilation, and during the interim period of maintenance. Knowledge of the
Supreme Lord includes knowledge of Brahman and Paramätmä and thus it is perfect.
Paramätmä  is  the  plenary  portion  of  the  Supreme  Lord  and  Brahman  is  His  bodily
effulgence.
yathä hiraëyaà sv-akåtaà purastät paçcäc ca sarvasya hiraë-mayasya
tad eva madhye vyavahäryamäëaà nänäpadeçair aham asya tadvat
Gold is present before the manufacture of gold bangles, earrings, and so on; and gold
remains after the destruction of these products. Thus, gold alone is the essential reality
while  it  is  being  utilized  under  various  designations.  Similarly,  I  alone  exist  before  the
creation of this universe, after its destruction, and during its period of maintenance.
COMMENTARY
Golden bangles and earrings are nothing but gold. Before and after their manufacture,
they existed as gold, and for as long as they remain, they are simply gold. Similarly, the
Supreme Lord alone exists before the creation, He alone exists after its destruction, and
in the interim, whatever is manifested, is actually Him alone.
PURPORT
Just  as  the  influence  of  time  transforms  manufactured  objects  such  as  earrings,
back to their original state as the ingredient, gold, similarly, the Supreme Lord directs
His energy to create a seeming distinction between the created universe and Himself,
although  after  annihilation,  only  He  remains.  The  forms  of  the  created  objects  are
eternal and factual but because the material manifestations are mere reflections of these
eternal objects, they are illusory.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Jï äna-yoga
vijïänam etat triy-avastham aìgaguëa-trayaà käraëa-karya-kartå
samanvayena vyatirekataç ca yenaiva turyeëa tad eva satyam
O Uddhava, the mind manifests in three phases of consciousness—wakefulness, sleep
and  deep  sleep—which  are  products  of  the  three  modes  of  material  nature.  The  mind
further appears in three different roles—ädhyätmika, ädhibhautika, and ädhidaivika—
which  are  the  perceiver,  the  perceived,  and  the  regulator  of  perception.  However,  it  is
the  fourth  factor,  existing  separately  from  all  this,  that  alone  constitutes  the  Absolute
Truth.
COMMENTARY
The word vijïäna in this verse indicates the three states of existence—wakefulness,
dreaming,  and  deep  sleep,  which  are  products  of  the  three  modes  of  material  nature.
The threefold manifestation of ädhibhautika, ädhidaivika, and ädhyätmika, are also the
result of the interactions of the three material modes, as are the three planetary systems.
However, the Absolute Truth is fully transcendental to the modes of material nature,
and it is under His subordination that everything becomes manifest. Vedic evidence is
found in this regard:
tam eva bhäntam anu bhäti sarvaà
tasya bhäsä sarvam idaà vibhäti
It  is  by  the  reflection  of  the  spiritual  sky’s  effulgence  that  everything  else
gives light, and thus through its radiance, this entire universe becomes luminous.
(Çvetäçvatara Upaniñads 6.14)
cakñuñaç cakñur uta çrotrasya çrotram
annasyännaà manaso ye mano viduù.
The Supreme Truth is understood to be the life air sustaining everyone’s life
air, the vision of everyone’s eyes, the hearing power of the ear, and the sustenance
of food itself. (Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad 4.4.18)
PURPORT
There are two causes—the immediate cause and the ingredient cause. All actions
take place by the combination of these two. When the living entities become conditioned
by  matter,  they  directly  and  indirectly  take  shelter  of  the  three  material  modes  of
goodness,  passion  and  ignorance,  which  are  the  cause  of  three  states  of  existence—
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
710 Chapter 22
wakefulness,  dreaming,  and  deep  sleep.  The  words  “reality”  and  “illusion”  have  been
used to indicate the eternal abode of the Lord, Vaikuëöha, and the temporary material
world, respectively.
na yat purastäd uta yan na paçcän madhye ca tan na vyapadeça-mätram
bhütaà prasiddhaà ca pareëa yad yat tad eva tat syäd iti me manéñä
That which did not exist before creation and will not exist after annihilation has no
real existence during the period of its manifestation, but is only a superficial designation.
In  My  opinion,  whatever  is  produced  from  something  else  is  nothing  more  than  that
thing.
COMMENTARY
Although the temporary forms manifested by the material nature are illusory, the
material  nature  itself  is  not  false,  being  a  manifestation  of  the  Lord’s  potency.  The
material nature is thus non-different from the Lord, although the temporary designations
of the conditioned souls are illusion. Everything should be properly understood in terms
of the Personality of Godhead, who is the essential reality of the cosmic manifestation.
PURPORT
The objects of material enjoyment did not exist in the beginning, will not exist at
the end, and remain manifest only for a brief period during the interim. This material
world is a creation of cause and effect and the original cause is the Supreme Personality
of  Godhead.  Thus,  it  can  only  be  concluded  that  everything  in  existence  is  nothing
but  the  Supreme  Lord,  at  any  phase  of  its  manifestation.  The  energy  of  the  Lord  is
simultaneously one with and different from the Lord, just as the heat and light emanating
from  the  sun  are  simultaneously  one  with  and  distinct  from  the  sun.  In  the  ultimate
issue, however, it must be concluded that everything is actually the Supreme Lord, who
is one without a second.
There is a tendency for the conditioned soul to consider the temporary objects of
this world as ultimate reality. However, when one who is in ignorance gradually realizes
that  such  temporary  manifestations  are  actually  unwanted  impositions  upon  the  pure
soul, he can renounce his false position as an enjoyer of the material nature and become
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Jï äna-yoga
inclined toward the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When one comes to
the platform of devotional service, there is no longer a need to declare that the material
world is false, or separate from the Supreme Lord.
avidyamäno ‘py avabhäsate yo vaikäriko räjasa-sarga esaù
brahma svayaà jyotir ato vibhäti brahmendriyärthätma-vikära-citram
Although thus not existing as an eternal reality, this cosmic manifestation, which is a
transformation of the mode of passion, appears to be real because it is the self-manifested,
self-luminous  Absolute  Truth  that  has  exhibited  Himself  in  the  form  of  the  material
senses, sense objects, mind, and elements.
COMMENTARY
That this material world is non-different from the Supreme Lord is being explained
in this verse. All visible objects, and their transformations, are born from the mahat-
tattva,  or  the  total  material  nature.  By  agitating  the  dormant  material  nature,  the
Lord  creates  through  the  agency  of  the  mode  of  passion.  The  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead is thus the cause of all causes. Indeed, it is because the senses, sense objects,
mind, five material elements, and all other manifestations in this world are expansions
of the energy of the Absolute Truth that they appear to be real.
PURPORT
The  Supreme  Brahman  is  unchanging  and  thus  the  material  nature  is  not  a
transformation of His primordial personality, but rather, a transformation of His energy.
Simply  because  the  external  energy  of  the  Lord  manifests  material  variegatedness,
one  should  not  hastily  conclude  that  the  spiritual  realm  is  without  variety.  Spiritual
variegatedness  is  a  fact  and  the  material  varieties  that  we  experience  are  simply
reflections of the original objects. The material variegatedness is temporarily manifest
by the action of the mode of passion and later on, is dissolved by the mode of ignorance.
While such creation and annihilation repeatedly takes place within the material nature,
the supreme abode of the Lord, Vaikuëöha, remains unaffected.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
712 Chapter 22
evaà sphutaà brahma-viveka-hetubhiù paräpavädena viçäradena
chittvätma-sandeham upärameta svänanda-tuñöo ‘khila-kämukebhyaù
Thus clearly understanding, by means of discrimination, the position of the Absolute
Truth, one should give up his false identification with matter and thus remove all doubts
regarding  his  identity.  One  should  remain  satisfied  with  the  soul’s  inherent  ecstasy  on
the  spiritual  platform  and  carefully  avoid  engaging  in  useless  acts  of  mundane  sense
enjoyment.
COMMENTARY
To consider the body as the self is an illusion. One should remove this illusion by
understanding  the  unique  and  transcendental  position  of  the  Absolute  Truth.  There
are  various  methods  for  acquiring  knowledge  of  the  Absolute  Truth.  A  person  of
discrimination should remove all misgivings regarding the self and remain satisfied in
his natural ecstasy, while keeping sense gratification at a distance.
PURPORT
It is imperative for one who desires to realize his eternal self to detach himself from
the  activities  of  sense  gratification  beyond  the  bare  necessities  of  the  body.  One  who
understands that the Supreme Lord is the cause of all causes can accept that the objects
of  the  senses  are  not  actually  meant  for  his  personal  enjoyment.  Taking  the  opposite
stance, when one tries to engage everything at his disposal in the service of the master of
the senses, his doubts are destroyed as he rises to the platform of satisfaction in the self.
This material world is not a fit place for a liberated soul. The only duty of the liberated
soul is service to the transcendental Cupid, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
nätmä vapuù pärthivam indriyäëi devä hy asur väyur jalam hutäçaù
mano ‘nna-mätraà dhiñaëä ca sattvam ahaìkåtiù khaà kñitir artha-sämyam
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Jï äna-yoga
The material body, which is predominantly made of earth, is not the true self—nor
are the senses, their presiding demigods, the air of life, the external air, water, fire, or
one’s  mind.  All  these  are  simply  matter.  Similarly,  neither  one’s  intelligence,  material
consciousness, ego, ether, the objects of sense perception, nor even the primeval state of
material equilibrium can be considered the actual identity of the soul.
COMMENTARY
This material body is not the self. Indeed, it is simply a product of matter, just like a
pot. Similarly, the senses, their controlling deities, the mind, life air, intelligence, heart,
and false ego are not the identity of the soul, because they depend on food grains. The
five gross material elements—earth, water, fire, air, and ether—the five sense objects—
sound,  form,  taste,  smell,  and  touch—do  not  pertain  to  the  soul  because  they  are  all
products of matter.
PURPORT
The  material  body,  senses,  demigods,  life  air,  mind,  intelligence,  and  false  ego  are
all  gross  and  subtle  products  of  matter  and  thus  are  distinct  from  the  conscious  self.
It is only due to ignorance that one identifies the eternal spirit soul with any of these
temporary manifestations of matter.
samähitaiù kaù karaëair guëätmabhir guëo bhaven mat-suvivikta-dhämnaù
vikñipyamäëair uta kià nu düñaëaà ghanair upetair vigatai raveù kim
For one who has properly realized My personal identity as the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, what credit is there if his senses, which are products of the modes of nature,
are perfectly concentrated in meditation, and what blame is incurred if his senses happen
to become agitated? What does it mean to the sun when the clouds come and go in the
sky?
COMMENTARY
The pure devotees of the Lord are not to be criticized or praised simply on the basis
of a materialist’s perception of the activities of their senses. The senses of pure devotees
are fully engaged in the service of the Lord and their minds are absorbed in meditation
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
714 Chapter 22
upon Him. Such exalted devotees never deviate from their Kåñëa consciousness, even if
their senses are sometimes agitated.
PURPORT
When it is cloudy so that we cannot see the sun, it is not that the sun is covered—it is
our imperfect eyes that are covered. Similarly, it may appear to the vision of a materialistic
person  that  the  activities  of  a  liberated  devotee  of  the  Lord  are  performed  under  the
influence of the three modes of material nature, and thus faulty. However, the fact is
that  the  Supreme  Lord,  His  dedicated  servants,  and  the  process  of  devotional  service
cannot be hampered by material conditions because they are under the jurisdiction of
the Lord’s internal potency.
yathä nabho väyv-analämbu-bhü-guëair gatägatair vartu-guëair na sajjate
tathäkñaraà sattva-rajas-tamo-malair ahaà-mateù saàsåti-hetubhiù param
The  sky  is  never  affected  by  the  various  qualities  of  the  air,  fire,  water,  and  earth
that pass through it, as well as such qualities as heat and cold, which continually come
and  go  with  the  seasons.  Similarly,  the  Supreme  Absolute  Truth  is  never  tinged  by
the  contaminations  of  the  modes  of  goodness,  passion,  and  ignorance,  which  cause  the
transformations of false ego.
COMMENTARY
A  liberated  soul  is  not  to  be  judged  in  terms  of  so-called  material  good  qualities
or  faults.  The  example  of  the  sky  is  given  in  this  regard.  The  sky  never  mixes  with
anything. It is not dried by the air, burnt by fire, covered by dust, or influenced by the
seasons, such as the heat of the summer or the cold of winter. Similarly, the Supreme
Lord is never contaminated by the three material modes of nature.
PURPORT
The Absolute Truth is unchanging and unaffected by material conditions, as is the
liberated soul. Although the air blows everywhere and the elements of fire, earth, and
water contact the sky, it never mixes with any of them The unlimited Supreme Lord is
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Jï äna-yoga
the master of material nature, whereas the infinitesimal living entities are covered by
Maya.
tathäpi saìgaù parivarjanéyo guëeñu mäyä-raciteñu tävat
mad-bhakti-yogena dåòhena yävad rajo nirasyeta manaù-kañäyaù
Still, until one has completely eliminated from his mind all material contamination, by
undivided engagement in My devotional service, one must very carefully avoid associating
with the modes of material nature, which are products of My illusory energy.
COMMENTARY
A neophyte jïäné should not whimsically try to imitate the behavior of a liberated
soul. This warning is given in this and the next verses. The word rajo means “attachment.”
The word guëeñu means “in material objects.”
PURPORT
Although  the  material  nature  is  non-different  from  the  Supreme  Lord,  one  who
has yet to conquer material desire should not unrestrictedly associate with the objects
of the senses, declaring them to be non-different from the Lord. One who is aspiring to
be Kåñëa conscious should not loosely associate with women, claiming them to be non-
different from the Personality of Godhead, for by such imitation of the most advanced
devotees,  one  will  simply  remain  on  the  platform  of  material  sense  gratification.  A
neophyte devotee who presumes himself to be liberated is impelled by the mode of passion
to  become  falsely  proud  of  his  position.  As  a  result,  he  neglects  the  actual  process  of
devotional service to the Lord. The conclusion is that devotees should always carefully
avoid bad association. If one who is not firmly fixed in devotional service claims to be
a liberated soul, he should be considered a pseudo devotee who is driven by the mode
of  passion.  Pseudo  devotees  gradually  become  self-worshipers.  This  is  the  meaning  of
sahajiya, or one who takes things very cheaply.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
716 Chapter 22
yathämayo ‘sädhu cikitsito nåëäà punaù punaù santudati prarohan
evaà mano ‘pakva-kañäya-karma kuyoginaà vidhyati sarva-saìgam
Just as a disease that is not treated repeatedly recurs, causing one great distress, if the
mind is not purified of all material contamination, then it will remain attached to material
things and repeatedly torment the imperfect yogé.
COMMENTARY
The conditional state of material existence is considered to be diseased condition of
life which requires treatment by the expert physician, the bona fide spiritual master. The
disease of the heart is material attachment and as long as this condition remains, one
will continue to suffer the pangs of material existence. Even those who are supposedly
engaged in the service of the Supreme Lord, if they stubbornly remain attached to wife,
children, and so on, their material condition of life will continue.
PURPORT
Under  the  shelter  of  a  pseudo  spiritual  master,  non-devotees  embrace  mental
speculation and gross sense gratification under the influence of bad association. If one is
treated by a physician who is not experienced, although the symptom of the disease may
temporarily disappear, there is every possibility of a relapse. The conclusion is that it is
essential to completely give up the association of sense enjoyers and those making a show
of false renunciation. When one’s offense against the holy name of the Lord in the form
of  maintaining  the  false  egoistic  conception  of  “I”  and  “mine”  is  very  prominent,  the
result is that one remains attached to his sons, wife, relatives, father, mother, wealth, and
country. The practice of pseudo devotional service cannot cure one’s material disease.
Even while serving Lord Hari, such a pseudo devotee will find that his attachment for
wife, children, and so on simply increases.
kuyogino ye vihitäntaräyair manuñya-bhütais tridaçopasåñöaiù
te präktanäbhyäsa-balena bhüyo yuïjanti yogaà na tu karma-tantram
Sometimes the progress of a neophyte transcendentalist is impeded due to excessive
attachment to family members or others, who are sent by envious demigods. However, on
the strength of their spiritual advancement, such imperfect transcendentalists will resume
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Jï äna-yoga
their  practice  of  yoga  in  the  next  life.  They  will  never  again  be  bound,  like  ordinary
materialists, in the network of karma.
COMMENTARY
Sometimes  sannyäsés  and  others  become  bewildered  by  friends,  well-wishers,  or
flattering disciples that are sent by the demigods to embarrass them. Therefore, in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (10.87.39) it has been stated:
yadi na samuddharanti yatayo hådi käma-jaöä
Members of the renounced order who fail to uproot the last traces of material
desire in their hearts remain impure.
It is to be understood that a sannyäsé’s position is completely distinct from that of
others who are engaged in devotional service. This is confirmed in the Vedas: yasmät
tadeñam na priyam yadetan manuñyä viduù: No human being is dear to a sannyäsé.
PURPORT
The conditioned souls, who work hard for the satisfaction of their senses, are tightly
bound  by  the  network  of  fruitive  activities.  When  such  conditioned  souls  take  to  the
practice  of  yoga,  the  envious  demigods  may  place  obstacles  on  their  path  by  sending
flattering  disciples  or  bodily  relations.  Although  an  imperfect  transcendentalist  may
thus fall down from yoga practice, he will resume it in his next life, on the strength of
his accumulated merit.
karoti karma kriyate ca jantuù kenäpy asau codita ä-nipatät
na tatra vidvän prakåtau sthito ‘pi nivåtta-tåñëaù sva-sukhänubhütyä
The  conditioned  living  entity  performs  fruitive  work  and  suffers  and  enjoys  the
reactions to his karma. Thus, he continues to work fruitively right up to the very moment
of his death. One who is wise, however, after experiencing transcendental ecstasy, gives
up all material desires and refrains from engaging in fruitive work.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
718 Chapter 22
COMMENTARY
Unlike karmés, jïänés do not allow themselves to become entangled in the bondage
of fruitive work. This is being explained in this verse. All conditioned souls are working
hard in this world, under the direction of the three modes of material nature. By their
activities, they determine their future body, whether that of a demigod, human being,
dog, or hog. Although there is great risk of becoming degraded, fruitive workers go on
with their self-centered activities up until the point of death. However, those who are
actually wise renounce fruitive activities, even while living in the material world, and
thus they free themselves from the bondage of karma.
PURPORT
Materialistic  persons  engage  in  fruitive  activities  so  that  they  can  enjoy  sense
gratification  On  the  other  hand,  one  who  is  on  the  platform  of  self-realization  does
not  regard  himself  as  an  enjoyer  of  the  material  world.  Rather,  he  regards  the  entire
creation as an expansion of the Lord’s potency, and he sees himself as the Lord’s humble
servant.
tiñöhantam äsénam uta vrajantaà çayänam ukñantam adantam annam
svabhävam anyat kim apéhamänam ätmänam ätma-stha-matir na veda
One whose consciousness is absorbed in thought of the Lord does not even understand
how his body is acting. While walking, sitting, standing, lying down, passing urine, eating,
or doing anything else, he simply thinks that the body is acting according to its acquired
nature.
COMMENTARY
One who is wise remains aloof from the functions of the material body. This is what
is being explained in this verse. One who is fully absorbed in Kåñëa consciousness would
hardly notice even if someone passed urine on his body. One whose intelligence is fixed
on the Supreme Lord hardly remembers that he has a material body.
PURPORT
A  self-realized  soul  does  not  take  part  in  the  activities  of  material  enjoyment  or
artificial  renunciation  because  all  of  his  activities  are  dovetailed  in  the  service  of
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Jï äna-yoga
Lord  Kåñëa.  Although  he  is  detached  from  the  functions  of  the  material  body,  he
enthusiastically engages his material body in the service of the Lord.
yadi sma paçyaty asad-indriyärthaà nänänumänena viruddham anyat
na manyate vastutayä manéñé sväpnaà yathotthäya tirodadhänam
Although  a  self-realized  soul  encounters  material  objects  and  activities,  which  are
temporary, he does not accept them as reality, just as a man awakening from sleep views
his fading dream as an illusory manifestation of the mind.
COMMENTARY
Although a self-realized soul is absorbed in Kåñëa consciousness, he must perform
routine duties in relation to the material body but he does not consider such activities as
factual, just as one has awakened from sleep does not consider his dreams to be reality.
PURPORT
While dreaming, one experiences various emotions but when one awakens, he can
understand that such feelings have no basis in reality. Similarly, one who is actually wise
understands that the objects he experiences while awake, and the activities he performs
for the maintenance of his material body, have no basis in ultimate reality, which exists
apart  from  this  temporary  material  manifestation.  Indeed,  the  pleasures  and  pains  of
material existence are simply the result of being in the bodily concept of life, forgetting
one’s identity as pure spirit soul. For a self-realized soul, reality is his engagement in the
devotional service of the Supreme Lord, which is distinct from the day dreams and night
dreams of the conditioned souls.
pürvaà gåhétaà guëa-karma-citram ajïänam ätmany aviviktam aìga
nivartate tat punar ékñayaiva na gåhyate näpi visåyya ätmä
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
720 Chapter 22
My  dear  Uddhava,  material  nescience,  which  expands  into  many  varieties  by  the
activities, is wrongly accepted by the conditioned soul to be the actual condition of the
self. But, through the cultivation of spiritual knowledge, this nescience fades away as one
proceeds towards liberation. The eternal self is never wrongly accepted nor rejected at any
stage, however.
COMMENTARY
Knowledge is the destroyer of ignorance. All activities performed under the influence
of the three modes of material nature during the conditional state of existence are born
of ignorance. Although illusory, such activities appear to be real to the conditioned soul.
One  should  try  to  vanquish  his  ignorance  by  the  cultivation  of  spiritual  knowledge.
Ignorance  is  only  accepted  due  to  lack  of  proper  understanding,  and  so  it  is  rejected
when one becomes enlightened with the knowledge of the self, which is changeless and
eternal.
PURPORT
The visible objects of this world are always subject to transformation. The knowledge
that is cultivated by a seer whose senses are imperfect is another side of ignorance. The
pure  spirit  soul,  on  the  other  hand,  is  unchanging  and  without  the  four  defects  that
are characteristic of conditional life. Whatever activities the conditioned soul performs
under  the  direction  of  false  ego,  which  is  the  creation  of  the  modes  of  nature,  have
a  foundation  of  ignorance.  When  spiritual  knowledge  is  awakened,  one  regards  his
previous  experiences  as  inconsequential.  This  is  the  symptom  of  self-realization.  One
should never mistakenly equate temporary material existence with liberated existence
in  the  spiritual  realm.  It  is  only  by  identification  with  the  temporary  material  body
and subtle mind that one engages in the meaningless activities of sense gratification or
artificial renunciation.
yathä hi bhänor udayo nå-cakñuñäà tamo nihanyän na tu sad vidhatte
evaà samékñä nipuëä saté me hanyät tamisraà puruñasya buddheù
Just as, when the sun rises, it destroys the darkness covering men’s eyes, but it does
not create the objects they perceive, so factual realization of Me destroys the ignorance
covering one’s pure consciousness.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Text35
Jï äna-yoga
COMMENTARY
One  who  is  self-realized  understands  that  the  soul  is  not  subject  to  material
transformation.  It  is  changeless  and  eternal.  Attributing  material  designations  to  the
spirit  soul  is  simply  a  result  of  ignorance.  When  the  sun  rises,  the  darkness  covering
one’s eyes is removed so that one can see things as they are. Similarly, realization of the
self dispels the darkness of ignorance, which covers his real knowledge.
PURPORT
The contamination of an object is a temporary imposition. When the contamination
is removed, the object displays its original purity. When one’s intelligence is fully engaged
in the service of the Supreme Lord, the propensities for material enjoyment and artificial
renunciation leave his association. When one’s contaminated material concept of life is
vanquished, he regains his natural and healthy state of serving the Supreme Lord. Just
as, when the sun rises, one can see things as they are, similarly when the darkness of
ignorance is dispelled by realization of the self, one can engage in his natural condition
as the eternal servant of the Supreme Lord.
eña svayaà-jyotir ajo ‘prameyo mahänubhütiù sakalänubhütiù
eko ‘dvitéyo vacasäà viräme yeneñitä väg-asavaç caranti
The  Supreme  Lord  is  self-luminous,  unborn,  and  immeasurable.  He  is  pure
transcendental consciousness, all-pervading knowledge, and one without a second. He is
realized only after ordinary words cease. By Him the power of speech and the life airs are
set into motion.
COMMENTARY
The Supersoul is compared to the sun, whereas the individual souls are compared to
the rays of the sun. The distinction between the Supersoul and the innumerable spirit
souls is being described in this verse. The Supersoul is self-manifest and self-effulgent,
but the living entities are manifested by Him. The Lord is unborn, but the living entities
become  subject  to  material  designations.  The  Lord  is  immeasurable,  or  all  pervading,
whereas the living entities are localized. The Supersoul is the supreme spirit whole, and
the living entities are His minute parts and parcels. He is omniscient, whereas the living
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
722 Chapter 22
entity  is  only  aware  of  his  limited  experience.  The  Supreme  Lord  is  one,  whereas  the
living entities are many. Any description of the Supreme Lord is beyond the power of
the words of the conditioned souls. It is said in the Vedas, yato väco nivartante apräpya
manasä saha: The descriptive power of speech fails in the realm of the Supreme Truth,
and the speculative power of the mind cannot achieve Him.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is unborn, beyond the range of the material senses, fully spiritual,
not  bound  by  time,  space,  or  circumstances,  omniscient,  and  one  without  a  second.
When the limit of one’s speech is attained within this world, the Supreme Lord remains
far beyond reach. Rather, by the influence of the Supreme Lord, the power of speech
comes to life. It is the Lord who awards the power of the senses to the conditioned souls
and  when  He  desires,  that  power  is  withdrawn.  The  relationship  of  the  independent
Lord  with  the  minute  living  entities  is  technically  called  svajätéya-bheda.  The  living
entities’ relationship with the material nature is technically called vijätéya-bheda. The
Lord’s relationship with the spiritual nature is termed svagata-bheda. Being influenced
by the external energy of the Lord, there is confusion in the minds of the Mäyävädés
regarding svagata-bheda, svajätéya-bheda, and vijätéya-bheda. The enlightened view of
these words is that they establish the supremacy of the Lord, whereas the unenlightened
view  misconstrues  a  meaning  that  there  is  an  existence  separate  from  the  Supreme
Lord.
etävän ätma-sammoho yad vikalpas tu kevale
ätman åte svam ätmänam avalambo na yasya hi
Whatever duality appears to be applicable to the self is simply a manifestation of the
mind’s bewilderment. There is no factual basis of such duality except the fact that it is
imagined by the conditioned soul.
COMMENTARY
One may question: How can the Supersoul be one without a second when we can
directly  see  that  this  visible  world  is  separate  from  Him?  The  answer  is:  There  is  no
duality  present  in  the  soul,  and  so  what  to  speak  of  the  Supreme  Soul.  Whatever  is
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Jï äna-yoga
perceived as being separate from the Lord is not because everything in existence is the
Lord  and  His  energies.  The  perception  of  duality  is  simply  due  to  a  state  of  delusion
within  the  mind.  That  the  Supersoul  is  one  without  a  second  is  stated  in  the  Vedas:
neha nänästi kiïcana: Besides this, nothing exists.
PURPORT
The soul is pure spiritual existence, without any tinge of matter. After comprehending
the  illusory  nature  of  material  variegatedness,  one  should  not  foolishly  conclude
that  there  is  no  difference  between  the  minute  souls  and  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead. The Lord is always in a superior position and the living entities are eternally
subordinate.  The  soul  is  naturally  free  from  material  association  but  by  misuse  of  his
minute  independence,  he  becomes  conditioned  by  Maya.  Transcendental  reality  has
nothing to do with material variegatedness. It is most unreasonable to try to attribute the
characteristics of this material world to the Lord’s eternal characteristics and pastimes.
The conception of duality that is born from the deluded mind of the conditioned soul
can never cover the effulgent glory of spiritual variegatedness.
yan nämäkåtibhir grähyaà païca-varëam abädhitam
vyarthenäpy artha-vädo ‘yaà dvayaà paëòita-mäninäm
The duality that is applied to the five gross material elements is understood by their
names and forms. Those who claim that such a dualistic conception is reality are mundane
scholars who proudly put forward their theories without actual realization of the truth.
COMMENTARY
Cotton is the cause of cloth and cloth is the effect of cotton. Cloth could not exist
without  the  existence  of  cotton.  No  genuinely  learned  man  could  fail  to  understand
this.  This  visible  world  of  names  and  forms,  composed  of  the  five  gross  elements,  is
perceivable by the material senses. All such manifestations have a  beginning and an
end and so are not ultimate reality. The Supreme Personality of Godhead had previously
stated in this chapter:
pratyakñeëänumänena nigamenätma-saàvidä
ädy-antavad asaj jïätväniùsaìgo vicared iha
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
724 Chapter 22
By direct perception, logical deduction, scriptural authority, and personal realization,
one should know that this world has a beginning and an end and so is not the ultimate
reality. Thus, one should live in this world without attachment.
PURPORT
Material  names  and  forms,  having  a  beginning  and  an  end,  have  no  permanent
existence  and  so  do  not  constitute  essential  reality.  This  cosmic  manifestation  is  a
transformation of one of the energies of the Supreme Lord. The Lord is the Absolute
Truth and His potencies are also truth, but the names and forms that are temporarily
manifested  in  this  material  world  have  no  eternal  existence.  There  are  two  kinds  of
pseudo-scholars—those who accept matter as ultimate reality, and those who imagine
spirit to be devoid of variegatedness. Neither group accepts the transcendental pastimes
of the Supreme Lord, and so they are not fit to be addressed as actually learned. The
cultivation of knowledge devoid of the service of the Supreme Lord, who is beyond the
reach of mundane sense perception, is the only asset of such pseudo-scholars.
yogino ‘pakva-yogasya yuïjataù käya utthitaiù
upasargair vihanyeta taträyaà vihito vidhiù
The  physical  body  of  a  neophyte  yogi,  who  has  not  yet  achieved  maturity  in  his
practice, may sometimes be afflicted by various disturbances, such as disease. For them,
the following process is recommended.
COMMENTARY
After  outlining  the  process  of  jïäna-yoga,  the  Lord  herein  gives  instructions  to
those  who  are  disturbed  by  disease  or  other  impediments.  Yogis  who  are  still  on  the
material platform, due to incomplete realization, are given some suggestions by the Lord
in this regard.
PURPORT
Often,  haöha-yogés  and  raja-yogés,  who  disregard  devotional  service  to  the  Lord,
cannot complete their yoga practice, due to remaining in the bodily conception of life.
The process of devotional service to the Lord, which is the constitutional duty of the soul,
has been prescribed to elevate such imperfect yogis to the transcendental platform.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Jï äna-yoga
yoga-dhäraëayä käàçcid äsanair dhäraëänvitaiù
tapo-mantrauñadhaiù käàçcid upasargän vinirdahet
Some  disturbances,  such  as  heat  and  cold,  can  be  counteracted  by  meditating  on
the  sun  and  moon.  Illnesses,  such  as  gastric  disorders,  can  be  restrained  by  practicing
sitting postures  and  breath  control.  Performance of  penance,  chanting  of  mantras,  and
the application of medicinal herbs can counteract inauspicious planetary positions, fear of
snakebite, and so on.
COMMENTARY
By practicing yoga and meditating on the sun and the moon, one can get relief from
the miseries caused by excessive heat and cold. By practicing äsanas and praëäyäma, one
can cure gastric ailments. By the performance of penance, the chanting of mantras, and
ingestion  of  medicinal  herbs,  one  can  neutralize  inauspiciousness  caused  by  planetary
positions and the threat of snakebites.
PURPORT
For  the  removal  of  obstacles  on  the  path  of  karma  yoga  and  haöha-yoga,  various
practices  have  been  advised.  Such  remedial  measures  are  only  for  those  who  are  not
surrendered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
käàçcin mamänudhyänena näma-saìkértanädibhiù
yogeçvaränuvåttyä vä hanyäd açubha-dän çanaiù
One  can  destroy  disturbances  such  as  lust  by  always  thinking  of  Me,  and  by
congregationally  chanting  My  holy  names.  One  can  destroy  the  obstacles  of  pride  and
false ego by following in the footsteps of the masters of mystic yoga.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
726 Chapter 22
COMMENTARY
One should overcome lust by meditating on the Supreme Lord. One should subdue
his pride by following in the footsteps of great souls.
PURPORT
By engaging in the practice of devotional service to the Supreme Lord, beginning with
hearing and chanting the Lord’s holy names, and meditating upon His transcendental
pastimes,  all  inauspiciousness  within  the  heart,  which  are  impediments  to  one’s
advancement, will gradually diminish.
kecid deham imaà dhéräù su-kalpaà vayasi sthiram
vidhäya vividhopäyair atha yuïjanti siddhaye
There are methods by which yogis can remain free from disease, and keep themselves
in a youthful condition of life, without experiencing the distresses of old age. Thus they
practice yoga for the purpose of achieving mystic perfections.
COMMENTARY
Some yogis employ various methods to keep their body fit and youthful, desiring to
attain mystic perfections. They try to master the mystic perfection of entering another’s
body so that they can utilize it for sense enjoyment. Such practices are not to be accepted
as devotional service to the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
The practice of haöha-yoga is generally accepted with a desire to attain the eighteen
kinds  of  mystic  perfection.  Such  practices  cannot  be  counted  as  limbs  of  devotional
service.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Jï äna-yoga
na hi tat kuçalädåtyaà tad-äyäso hy apärthakaù
antavattväc charérasya phalasyeva vanaspateù
Learned  persons  who  are  expert  in  transcendental  knowledge  do  not  very  highly
value these mystic perfections because the soul, like a tree, is permanent, and the body,
like the tree’s fruit, is perishable.
COMMENTARY
Those who have actually realized the eternal nature of the self are not tempted by
the allurements that mystic powers offer. The spirit soul is permanent, like a tree that
may live for a very long time, but the material body is soon to perish, like the fruit of the
tree that quickly spoils.
PURPORT
A tree produces seasonal fruit but even after the fruit is gone, the tree remains for
a  very  long  time.  Self-realized  souls,  knowing  perfectly  well  that  the  gross  and  subtle
bodies, which are temporary manifestations of material nature, are perishable, do not
undergo the severe penance required to obtain mystic powers.
yogaà niñevato nityaà käyaç cet kalpatäm iyät
tac chraddadhyän na matimän yogam utsåjya mat-paraù
Although the physical body may be improved by the practice of yoga, an intelligent
person who has dedicated his life to Me does not place his faith in such a prospect, and in
fact shuns such practices.
COMMENTARY
Even  if  there  is  the  prospect  of  achieving  a  duration  of  life  of  one  kalpa  by  the
practice of mystic yoga, an intelligent person will not place his faith in such a thing but
rather dedicate himself to Lord Kåñëa’s devotional service.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 22
uddhava-gétä
PURPORT
Although  in  the  scriptures  there  are  recommendations  for  the  performance  of
haöha-yoga, raja-yoga, and praëäyama, ultimately, it is advised that one become freed
from  all  types  of  material  bondage  by  faithfully  worshiping  the  Supreme  Lord  in  the
association  of  devotees.  The  devotees  of  the  Supreme  Lord  cannot  place  their  faith
in any process for overcoming lust, anger, and so on, other than devotional service to
Lord  Mukunda.  In  this  connection,  one  should  consider  this  verse  from  the  Çrémad-
Bhägavatam 1.6.36):
sarvaà tad idam äkhyätaà yat påñöo ‘haà tvayänagha
janma-karma-rahasyaà me bhavataç cätma-toñaëam
O  Vyäsadeva,  you  are  freed  from  all  sins.  Thus  I  have  explained  my  birth
and activities for self-realization, as you asked. All this will be conducive for your
personal satisfaction also.
yoga-caryäm imäà yogé vicaran mad-apäçrayaù
näntaräyair vihanyeta niùspåhaù sva-sukhänubhüù
My  unalloyed  devotee  is  without  material  hankering  because  he  is  satisfied  within
the self, and thus experiences unlimited happiness. Thus, while executing this process of
yoga, he is never deterred by impediments.
PURPORT
Although  the  followers  of  haöha-yoga  and  raja-yoga  make  some  progress  in  their
respective  practices,  they  generally  fail  to  gain  success  because  they  are  confronted
by numerous obstacles. However, one who surrenders to the Supreme Lord, who is the
transcendental Cupid, will certainly come out victorious on his path back home, back
to Godhead.
Thus ends the translation of the twenty-second chapter of the Uddhava-géta entitled,
“Jïäna-yoga,”  with  the  commentaries  of  Çréla  Viçvanätha  Cakravarté  Öhäkura  and
purports of Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 23
bhaKtI-yoga
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Uddhava thought that the process of jïäna-yoga that the Lord had described was
too difficult and so he asked about an easier means of self-realization. In reply the Lord
briefly described the process of devotional service.
Karmés and yogés, who are still under the inflence of the illusory energy of the Lord
and thus are very proud of their meager accomplishments, are not inclined to take shelter
at the lotus feet of the Lord. On the other hand, the swanlike men who can discriminate
between  matter  and  spirit  take  shelter  of  the  Lord  without  reservation.  The  Supreme
Lord resides within the hearts of all living entities, as the overseer and permitter, and
sometimes appears externally as the spiritual master, who teaches by example. He dispels
the living entities’ misfortune by revealing His eternal form.
One should perform all activities in the service of the Supreme Lord, keeping one’s
mind  fixed  upon  Him  in  all  circumstances.  One  should  reside  in  the  holy  places  of
pilgrimage that are related to the Supreme Lord, where many pure devotees of the Lord
reside,  and  one  should  take  part  in  the  festivals  that  celebrate  the  Lord’s  appearance,
and so on. One should at least theoretically understand that all living entities are places
of the Lord’s residence as the Supersoul, and thus cultivate equal vision so that material
prejudices will be vanquished. One should avoid intimate association with non-devotees,
and  renounce  desires  for  material  enjoyment.  In  this  frame  of  mind,  one  should  offer
obeisances to all, even the lowest of men and animals. As long as one cannot factually
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
730 Chapter 23
perceive  the  Supreme  Lord  present  within  all  beings,  one  should  continue  to  use  his
body, mind, and speech in the service of the Lord.
Because devotional service to the Supreme Lord is the eternal function of the spirit
soul, and is preached by the Lord Himself, it is always auspicious and successful. When
one surrenders to the Lord without duplicity, the Lord becomes satisfied. As a result, the
devotee attains eternal residence with the Lord in the spiritual sky and enjoys opulence
on the level of that of the Lord.
After  contemplating  the  Lord’s  instructions,  Uddhava  went  to  Badarikäçrama,  as
ordered  by  the  Lord.  By  perfectly  carrying  out  the  orders  of  the  Lord,  he  ultimately
attained the transcendental abode of the Lord. Indeed, anyone who faithfully assimilates
and then practices these instructions of the Lord will be freed from material existence.
´Î3{H 3HÌ=
çré-uddhava uväca
su-dustaräm imäà manye yoga-caryäm anätmanaù
yathäïjasä pumän siddhyet tan me brühy aïjasäcyuta
Çré Uddhava said: O infallible Lord, I think that it is very difficult for ordinary persons
who are not self-controlled to practice the yoga system described by You. Therefore, please
tell me more simply how one can easily attain perfection.
COMMENTARY
Taking shelter of exalted devotees and holy places that are associated with the Lord
enhances one’s devotional service. This will be described in this chapter. Uddhava had
difficulty imagining how anyone could follow the procedures of yoga that the Supreme
Lord had imparted to him. This is being explained in this verse. The process of yoga,
which  teaches  one  to  completely  give  up  all  attachment  for  the  material  body,  was
described in the previous chapter, but Uddhava thinks that this practice is too difficult
for the majority of people. He therefore requests the Lord to describe a process whereby
human  beings  can  easily  attain  success.  Although  the  word  aïjasä  has  been  spoken
twice  in  this  verse,  the  fault  of  redundancy  does  not  arise  because  each  indicates  a
separate cause.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Bhakti-yoga
präyaçaù puëdarékäkña yuïyanto yogino manaù
viñédanty asamädhänän mano-nigraha-karçitäù
O lotus-eyed Lord, yogis who try to steady the mind generally experience frustration
because  of  their  inability  to  do  so.  As  a  result,  they  become  weary  of  their  attempt  to
bring the mind under control.
COMMENTARY
The practice of yoga as described in previous chapter is extremely difficult to perform.
How this is so is being explained in this verse. In the course of trying to concentrate
their minds on Brahman, those who practice yoga often become frustrated, being unable
to do so.
athäta änanda-dughaà padämbujaà haàsäù çrayerann aravinda-locana
sukhaà nu viçveçvara yoga-karmabhis tvan-mäyayämé vihatä na mäninaù
Therefore,  O  lotus-eyed  Lord  of  the  universe,  swanlike  men  joyfully  take  shelter
of Your lotus feet, the source of all transcendental ecstasy. However, those who do not
surrender to You, being proud of their practice of yoga and karma, are defeated by Your
illusory energy.
COMMENTARY
Uddhava desires that the Lord explain the essence of yoga, which is understood by
men who are like swans, who can extract the milk from a mixture of milk and water.
Those  who  are  very  proud  of  their  positions  as  karmés,  jïänés,  and  yogis  are  actually
bewildered by the illusory energy of the Lord, and therefore undergo great difficulty.
PURPORT
The processes of yoga leading to spiritual perfection that are accepted by the non-
devotees do not provide the satisfaction experienced by those who render service unto
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
732 Chapter 23
the  lotus  feet  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  Actual  happiness  is  relished  in  the  service  of  the
all-blissful  Supreme  Lord,  and  distress  results  from  posing  as  an  enjoyer  in  the  bodily
concept of life.
kià citram acyuta tavaitad açeña-bandho däseñv ananya-çaraëesu yad ätma-sättvam
Yo ‘rocayat saha mågaiù svayam éçvaräëäà çrémat-kiréöa-taöa-péòita-päda-péöhaù
My  dear  infallible  Lord,  it  is  not  at  all  astonishing  that  You  intimately  relate  with
Your devotees who have taken shelter of You, such as Nanda Mahäräja, the gopés, and
Bali Mahäräja. After all, during Your appearance as Lord Rämacandra, when even great
personalities such as Brahmä desired to place the tips of their crowns at Your lotus feet,
You  nevertheless  showed  more  affection  for  monkeys,  such  as  Hanuman,  because  they
had taken exclusive shelter of You.
COMMENTARY
It is not surprising that those who serve the Supreme Lord receive His favor. The
word ananyaçaranaà indicates that the Supreme Lord fully protects His servants who
are  completely  free  from  the  contamination  of  karma  and  jïäna,  and  even  takes  a
position  of  subordination  to  them.  This  is  not  at  all  astonishing.  Although  the  king
is the ruler of society, he is directed by the brähmaëas. In the same way, the Supreme
Lord  is  controlled  by  His  dear  servants.  In  other  words,  the  Lord  allows  Himself  to
come under the control of His devotees. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, as Lord
Rämacandra,  established  friendship  with  monkeys,  and  as  Kåñëa,  He  enjoyed  tending
the cows in the pasturing grounds of Våndävana, and would steal butter and distribute
it to the monkeys. Such devotees of the Lord have no need for the elaborate jïäna-yoga
system  or  the  process  for  achieving  mystic  powers.  All  these  devotees  are  represented
here by Çré Uddhava, who frankly informs the Lord that the sophisticated systems of
philosophical speculation and mystic yoga are not appealing for one who has developed
a taste for direct loving service to the Lord.
PURPORT
Unalloyed  devotees  in  all  species  of  life  became  successful  in  establishing  a
relationship  of  friendship  with  the  Lord,  although  even  great  personalities,  such  as
Brahmä, could not do so.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Bhakti-yoga
taà tväkhilätma-dayiteçvaram äçritänäà sarvärtha-daà sva-kåta-vid visåjeta ko nu
ko vä bhajet kim api vismåtaye ‘nu bhütyai kià vä bhaven na tava päda-rajo-juñäà naù
Who could even think of rejecting You, the Supreme Soul, the most dear object of
worship, and the Supreme Lord of all, who awards all possible perfections to the devotees
who  take  shelter  of  You?  Who  could  be  so  ungrateful,  knowing  the  great  mercy  You
bestow? Who would reject You and accept something for the sake of material enjoyment,
which simply leads to a miserable condition of life? What is there lacking for us who are
engaged in the service of the dust of Your lotus feet?
COMMENTARY
The Lord is the well-wishing friend of all living entities, and for their benefit, He
imparts  instructions  on  devotional  service  to  His  empowered  representatives,  such  as
Närada Muni. The Lord is the bestower of the fruits of everyone’s activities because He
is the supreme controller, but He particularly fulfills all the desires of His devotees. The
Lord showered great compassion upon devotees such as Bali and Prahläda. Knowing this,
who would want to abandon Him? Only the most fallen, dry, and ungrateful yogis reject
the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. How can an unalloyed devotee of
the Lord desire elevation to the heavenly planets or liberation? How is it that devotees
such as Bali and Prahläda, who were free from material desires, attained such a status
of material enjoyment, and even liberation? The answer to this dilemma is found in the
Näräyaëéya of the Mokña-dharma section of the Mahäbhärata:
yä vai sädhana-sampattiù puruñärtha-catuñöaye
tayä vinä tad äpnoti naro näräyaëäçrayaù
Whatever  among  the  four  goals  of  human  life  can  be  achieved  by  various
spiritual practices is automatically achieved without such endeavors by the person
who has taken shelter of Lord Näräyaëa, the refuge of all persons.
Material enjoyment and liberation are simply by-products of the Lord’s inconceivable
mercy.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
734 Chapter 23
naivopayanty apacitià kavayas taveça
brahmäyuñäpi kåtam åddha-mudaù smarantaù
yo ‘ntar bahis tanu-bhåtäm açubhaà vidhunvann
äcärya-caittya-vapuñä sva-gatià vyanakti
My  dear  Lord,  those  who  are  learned  scholars  in  the  transcendental  science  could
never properly express their indebtedness to You, even with a lifetime of Brahmä, because
You manifest Yourself externally as the äcärya and internally as the Supersoul, to deliver
the conditioned souls by instructing them how to return to You.
COMMENTARY
“As  all  surrender  unto  Me,  I  reward  them  accordingly.”  This  reward  of  the  Lord
is  not  artificial—it  is  natural.  It  is  ultimately  the  Lord  who  is  the  bestower  of  the
results  of  everyone’s  activities.  Even  by  rendering  devotional  service  for  a  duration  of
one thousand kalpas, a devotee cannot repay the debt he feels to the Lord for having
awarded him loving service to His lotus feet. The word äpaciti indicates that a devotee
could not repay his debt to the Lord, even by rendering service to Him for the duration
of Brahmä’s life. The Lord guides the living entities from without as the mantra guru
and çikñä guru, and by imparting instructions of devotional service, and from within,
He guides the living entities as the Supersoul. The Lord has personally stated this in the
Bhagavad-gétä:
teñäà satata-yuktänäà bhajatäà préti-pürvakam
dadämi buddhi-yogaà taà yena mäm upayänti te
To  those  who  are  constantly  devoted  to  serving  Me  with  love,  I  give  the
understanding by which they can come to Me.
PURPORT
Expert and sober devotees, despite being very qualified and having a lifespan like that
of Brahmä, cannot repay the Lord’s favor upon them by awarding them auspiciousness
while remaining seated within their hearts as the Supersoul.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Bhakti-yoga
´Î¯Ì¸d 3HÌ=
çré-çuka uväca
Ity uddhavenäty-anurakta-cetasä påñöo jagat-kréòanakaù sva-çaktibhiù
gåhéta-mürti-traya éçvareçvaro jagäda sa-prema-manohara-smitaù
Çukadeva  Gosvämé  said:  Being  thus  questioned  by  the  most  affectionate  Uddhava,
Lord  Kåñëa,  the  master  of  the  demigods,  who  considers  the  entire  universe  as  His
plaything, and assumes the three forms of Brahmä, Viñëu and Çiva, began to reply while
lovingly displaying His all-attractive smile.
COMMENTARY
This material world is also a place for the Lord’s eternal pastimes. He enjoys in this
world with His internal, marginal, and external energies as the Supersoul within  the
hearts of all living entities. He inspired Uddhava from within to place before Him these
inquiries for the benefit of future devotees. The Lord exhibits His pastimes within this
material world, just to distribute the transcendental mellows of devotional service. Here,
Uddhava is the audience and Lord Kåñëa is the speaker. Similarly, Çukadeva Gosvämé
became  the  speaker  and  Mahäräja  Parikñit  became  the  listener.  These  conversations
shower the nectar for which all living entities are hankering. Çré Kåñëa alone is capable
of  bestowing  actual  mercy,  which  only  brings  unmixed  auspiciousness.  He  is  the
controller  of  all  the  universal  controllers.  He  spoke  to  Uddhava  while  displaying  His
most enchanting smile.
çré-bhagavän uväca
hanta te kathayiñyämi mama dharmän su-maìgalän
yän çraddhayäcaran martyo måtyuà jayati durjayam
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
736 Chapter 23
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Yes, I shall describe to you the religious
principles  of  devotion  to  Me,  by  executing  which  a  mortal  human  being  can  conquer
unconquerable death.
COMMENTARY
Out  of  compassion,  Lord  Kåñëa  will  explain  the  principles  of  devotional  service
unto  Him.  These  principles  are  very  auspicious  and  should  be  followed  by  all  human
beings  with  great  faith.  It  is  only  in  this  way  that  the  conditioned  souls  can  conquer
unconquerable death.
kuryät sarväëi karmäëi mad-arthaà çanakaiù smaran
mayy arpita-manaç-citto mad-dharmätma-mano-ratiù
While always remembering Me, one should perform his devotional and daily duties
for My satisfaction, without becoming impetuous. With mind and intelligence offered to
Me, one should cultivate attraction for My devotional service.
COMMENTARY
The  Lord  will  herein  describes  devotional  service  that  is  unmixed  with  karma
and  jïäna.  One  should  keep  his  body  clean  by  brushing  his  teeth  and  bathing.  One
should keep his existence in a purified state by hearing and chanting the glories of the
Supreme Lord. Ordinary human beings should follow the principles of varëäçrama, and
while  performing  all  activities,  they  should  remember  the  Supreme  Lord.  One  whose
heart is always fixed in meditation upon the Lord and His characteristics is a first-class
devotee.
deçän puëyän äçrayeta mad-bhaktaiù sädhubhiù çritän
deväsura-manuñyeñu mad-bhaktäcaritäni ca
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Bhakti-yoga
One should reside in a holy place that is inhabited by My saintly devotees, and one
should follow in their footsteps. Such devotees appear among the demigods, demons, and
human beings.
COMMENTARY
What is unalloyed devotional service? What is vaidhé-bhakti and rägänugä-bhakti?
These  are  being  explained,  one  after  another.  One  should  live  in  a  holy  place,  such
as  Dväräkä.  One  should  follow  the  instructions  and  exemplary  behavior  of  exalted
personalities like Närada Muni, Prahläda Mahäräja, and King Ambariña. This is called
vaidhi-bhakti,  or  regulative  devotional  service.  To  reside  in  a  holy  place,  like  Gokula,
Govardhana, or Våndävana, and follow in the footsteps of the gopés, like Candrakänti
and Våëdä, is called rägänuga-bhakti, or devotional service in attachment.
påthak satreëa vä mahyaà parva-yäträ-mahotsavän
kärayed géta-nåtyädyair mahäräja-vibhütibhiù
Whether  alone  or  in  an  assembly  of  devotees,  one  should  sing,  dance,  and  spend
lavishly to celebrate My appearance days, as well as other ceremonies and festivals that
are especially meant for My worship.
COMMENTARY
These basic principles apply to all types of devotional processes.
mäm eva sarva-bhüteñu bahir antar apävåtam
ékñetätmani cätmänaà yathä kham amaläçayaù
With a purified heart, one should see Me as being situated within his own self, as well
as within the hearts of all living entities, unblemished and all-pervading, like the sky.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
738 Chapter 23
COMMENTARY
After describing the duties of unalloyed devotees, Lord Kåñëa now speaks in a way
so  as  to  attract  the  jïänés.  Those  who  are  philosophically  searching  for  the  Absolute
Truth should understand how the Lord is transcendentally situated, without any tinge
of  matter,  although  He  is  all-pervading  and  situated  within  the  hearts  of  all  living
entities.
iti sarväëi bhütäni mad-bhävena mahä-dyute
sabhäjayan manyamäno jïänaà kevalam äçritaù
brähmaëe pukkase stene brahmaëye ‘rke sphuliìgake
akrüre krürake caiva sama-dåk paëòito mataù
O most-intelligent Uddhava, one who cultivates the understanding that I am present
in the heart of all living beings, and who offers respect to everyone, is to be considered
actually wise. Such a person sees equally the brähmaëa and the outcaste, the thief and
the person who gives charity to the brähmaëas, the sun and tiny sparks, the gentle and
the cruel.
COMMENTARY
Lord Kåñëa said, “O Uddhava, you should regard all living entities as My parts and
parcels  and  offer  them  due  respect.  Indeed,  such  consciousness  is  the  symptom  of  an
actually learned person.”
The  word  kevalam  is  an  adjective  of  the  verb  äçraya,  and  not  the  adjective  of
jïäna, because jïäna without devotional service is to be condemned. This could also be
taken to mean, “taking shelter of the non-dual Brahman, who is full of transcendental
knowledge.”
Although  there  is  a  social  distinction  between  a  brähmaëa  and  a  caëòäla,  a
behavioral  distinction  between  a  thief  and  a  charitable  man,  a  distinction  between  a
professional brähmaëa and a devotee brähmaëa, a quantitative distinction between the
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Bhakti-yoga
sun and a spark of fire, and a qualitative distinction between a ruffian and a gentleman,
one  should  see  all  of  them  with  equal  vision,  because  the  Supreme  Lord  is  situated
within  each  one.  One  who  sees  like  this  is  a  truly  wise  person,  and  who  does  not  is
certainly ignorant.
PURPORT
In this regard, one should consider this verse from the Bhagavad-gétä (5.18):
vidyä-vinaya-sampanne brähmaëe gavi hastini
çuni caiva çva-päke ca paëòitäù sama-darçinaù
The humble sages, by virtue of true knowledge, see with equal vision a learned
and gentle brähmaëa, a cow, an elephant, a dog, and a dog-eater [outcaste].
If one can see this material world in relation to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
then his liberation is guaranteed. As soon as one sees the material nature as separate
from  the  Lord,  his  constitutional  spirit  of  service  is  transformed  into  the  spirit  of
enjoyment. In this world, there is a superficial difference between those who are exalted
and those who are fallen, between the truthful and the liars, between the fire of the sun
and  that  of  a  small  spark,  and  between  gentle  person  and  a  cruel  ruffian.  When  one
ignores such differences of behavior and nature, considering them inconsequential in
comparison with their actual spiritual identities, then one’s vision of duality transforms
into equanimity. A learned person is he who is not diverted from the truth while viewing
the distinctions of this world of perverted enjoyment.
nareñv abhékñëaà mad-bhävaà puàso bhävayato ‘cirät
spardhäsüyä-tiraskäräù sähaìkärä viyanti hi
For one who constantly meditates on Me as being situated within all living entities,
all bad qualities such as rivalry, abusiveness, and arrogance, along with their cause, false
ego, are quickly vanquished.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
740 Chapter 23
COMMENTARY
One should practice seeing how the Supreme Lord is situated everywhere so that his
polluted qualities, such as arrogance, can be destroyed. In material consciousness, one
engages  in  rivalry  with  his  equals,  is  envious  of  superiors,  and  belittles  those  who  are
inferior.
visåjya smayamänän svän dåçaà vréòäà ca daihikém
praëamed daëòa-vad bhümäv ä-çva-cäëòäla-go-kharam
Ignoring the ridicule of one’s companions, one should renounce the bodily conception
of life and its concomitant embarrassments, and offer obeisances to all living beings, even
dogs, cows, donkeys, and untouchables, falling flat upon the ground just like a stick.
COMMENTARY
How one can cultivate equal vision, seeing everything in relation to the Supreme
Lord, is described in this verse. The purport is that one should learn how to see with
spiritual vision, and not remain satisfied with simply studying the bodily designations,
which,  after  all,  are  temporary.  Instead  of  showing  respect  or  contempt  according  to
external  circumstances,  one  should  show  respect  to  all  classes  of  living  entities,  even
dogs  and  dog-eaters,  knowing  that  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  is  present
within each of them as the Supersoul.
PURPORT
One  should  ignore  the  ridicule  of  envious  people,  while  showing  suitable  respect
for  all  living  beings,  even  dogs,  dog-eaters,  and  asses.  Çré  Caitanya  Mahäprabhu  has
instructed us to consider ourselves lower than a straw in the street and more tolerant
than  a  tree,  offering  respect  to  all  others  while  not  expecting  any  respect  for  oneself.
This is the secret of success in the matter of chanting the holy name of the Lord.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Bhakti-yoga
yävat sarveñu bhüteñu mad-bhävo nopajäyate
tävad evam upäséta väì-manaù-käya-våttibhiù
Until one is actually able to see Me within all living beings, one should worship Me
in the prescribed manner with his body, mind, and speech.
COMMENTARY
Until one has gained the realization that the Supreme Lord is residing within the
hearts of all living entities, it is recommended that one offer obeisances to varieties of
creatures as a means for elevating one to that highest platform. Although one may not
actually fall flat before every dog and donkey, at least one should carefully respect all
forms of life, knowing them to be part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, Thus, one should
show respect to all with one’s body, mind, and words.
PURPORT
While worshiping the Supreme Lord with one’s body, mind, and speech, one should
think oneself to be lower than a blade of grass, one should be more tolerant than a tree,
and one should be ready to give respect to all living entities without desiring any respect
in return. In such a state of mind, one can continuously engage in bhajana, or worship
of the Lord.
sarvaà brahmätmakaà tasya vidyayätma-manéñayä
paripaçyann uparamet sarvato muita-saàçayaù
By the cultivation of such transcendental knowledge, one should become free from
all  doubts  by  seeing  the  Supreme  Lord  everywhere  and  within  all  living  entities,  thus
remaining aloof from all kinds of fruitive activities.
COMMENTARY
By  the  advancement  of  transcendental  knowledge,  one  should  come  to  see  the
Supreme  Lord  everywhere.  It  is  a  fact  that  everything  in  existence  is  owned  and
controlled  by  the  Lord  and  being  well  aware  of  this,  one  should  refrain  from  fruitive
activities
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
742 Chapter 23
PURPORT
The more one advances in Kåñëa consciousness, the more one becomes freed from
all doubts. By constant engagement in devotional service, one can free oneself from all
reactions of fruitive work. In devotional service, one works under the direction of the
Supreme  Lord  and  His  representative,  the  spiritual  master,  whereas  fruitive  activities
are impelled by the three modes of material nature. The conditioned souls exhibit many
unfavorable qualities because their activities are based on envy. Such envy can only be
removed by dedicated worship of the Lord with one’s body, mind, and speech
ayaà hi sarva-kalpänäà sadhrécéno mato mama
mad-bhävaù sarva-bhüteñu mano-väk-käya-våttibhiù
I consider this process of utilizing one’s mind, words, and bodily functions for realizing
My presence within all living entities to be the best method of spiritual enlightenment.
COMMENTARY
For the jïänés, realization of impersonal Brahman is life’s ultimate goal.
na hy aìgopakrame dhvaàso mad-dharmasyoddhaväëv api
mayä vyavasitaù samyaì nirguëatväd anäçiñaù
My dear Uddhava, because the process of devotional service has been established by
Me, it is transcendental and free from any material considerations. There is no doubt that
a devotee will never suffer even the slightest loss by taking to this process.
COMMENTARY
After  explaining  the  essence  of  jïäna  in  eight  verses,  the  Lord  now  presents  the
essence  of  bhakti.  Although  the  compilers  of  the  scriptures  have  advocated  various
methods for elevation, this system of bhakti-yoga, or devotional service, was introduced
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Bhakti-yoga
by the Lord Himself.  However, a neophyte can easily be diverted from the other processes
so that no benefit is accrued, whereas the devotional service of the Lord never goes in
vain.  This  is  stated  in  this  verse—that  the  process  of  devotional  service  is  the  best
means of spiritual realization and such engagement can never be considered a loss.
Lord Kåñëa said: My dear Uddhava, if one begins the process of devotional service to
Me and becomes diverted before reaching perfection, there is still no loss or diminution
because bhakti-yoga is transcendental and is executed under My shelter. This supreme
religious practice is perfect in all respects because I am the fuly independent Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
The word mad-dharma in this verse refers to the principles of devotional service, and
not to the cultivation of knowledge. Jïäna, or the cultivation of knowledge, is not fully
transcendental and awards the successful performer impersonal liberation in Brahman,
and not the association of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
The desire for material enjoyment is the root cause of all anarthas. Only liberated
souls  who  have  renounced  material  enjoyment  are  actually  qualified  to  worship  Lord
Hari.
yo yo mayi pare dharmaù kalpyate niñphaläya cet
tad-äyäso nirarthaù syäd bhayäder iva sattama
O most pious Uddhava, when faced with a dangerous situation, an ordinary person
cries,  becomes  fearful,  and  laments,  although  such  useless  emotions  do  not  change  the
situation. However, activities offered to Me without personal motivation, even if they are
apparently useless, amount to the highest process of religion.
COMMENTARY
If  devotional  service  to  the  Lord  is  performed  without  desire  for  personal  gain,  it
will  help  elevate  one  to  the  spiritual  platform.  If  devotional  service,  beginning  with
hearing and chanting, is engaged in for the sake of achieving worldly or heavenly sense
gratification,  as  well  as  name  and  fame  in  this  life  or  liberation  in  the  next,  it  will
act,  but  only  gradually.  Devotional  service  is  the  supremely  powerful  process  of  self-
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
744 Chapter 23
realization and is capable of awarding one the ultimate goal of life, and so what to speak
of  other,  lesser  achievements.  The  scriptures  advise  that  a  Vaiñëava  need  not  worry
about his maintenance, such as food and clothing. The Lord is known as Viçvambhara,
the maintainer of the entire universe, and so how could He neglect His devotees? Still,
if  a  devotee  cries  to  the  Lord  for  protection  or  maintenance,  desiring  to  continue  his
devotional service without impediment, the Lord accepts such apparently unnecessary
appeals as the highest religious process, as stated in this verse.
PURPORT
One  who  performs  devotional  service  to  the  Supreme  Lord  is  never  the  loser.
Whatever  endeavor  a  devotee  makes  to  serve  the  Lord  never  goes  in  vain,  even  if  he
cannot complete the process in this lifetime. Being transcendental, service rendered to
the Lord is never forgotten or lost.
eñä buddhimatäà buddhir manéñä ca manéñiëäm
yat satyam anåteneha martyenäpnoti mämåtam
This process is the supreme intelligence of the intelligent and the cleverness of the
cleverest,  because  by  following  it,  one  can  make  use  of  that  which  is  temporary  and
illusory to achieve Me, the eternal reality.
COMMENTARY
Why  do  people  often  execute  devotional  service  in  the  hopes  of  gaining  fame,
and  other  personal  advantages?  The  reason  is  that  they  are  not  actually  intelligent.
This is the purport of this verse. One who poses as a great devotee to enjoy immense
prestige is not actually intelligent. Simply to imagine oneself to be a great preacher of
devotional service, or a great relisher of transcendental rasas, simply for enjoying fame
and reputation, is also not the sign of good intelligence.
One who has taken birth in Bhäratavarña should try to attain the eternal Supreme
Lord with the help of his temporary material body. One can obtain the eternal with the
help of the temporary. Conditioned souls can utilize their abominable material bodies to
achieve a sublime eternal form like that of the Supreme Lord.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Bhakti-yoga
According  to  the  material  conception,  one  who  can  earn  thousands  of  coins  by
investing  just  a  few  coins  is  considered  intelligent.  Especially  in  this  age,  those  who
possess the most wealth are considered to be the cleverest persons in society. However,
if one could somehow possess a touchstone or a wish-fulfilling cow, he would certainly
be considered even more clever and intelligent. Still, it must be understood that all such
possessions are temporary and thus ultimately useless.
If  those  who  have  been  born  in  Bhäratavarña  engage  their  temporary  material
bodies, which are composed of disgusting substances, prone to dwindle, full of disease,
and ultimately destroyed, in the service of the Supreme Lord, they can come to relish
the best of all possessions, love of God. The Lord gives His very self to those who are
devoted to Him without personal motivation. How wonderful such an attainment is! How
intelligent are the inhabitants of Bhäratavarña who engage in unmotivated devotional
service by hearing about the Lord, chanting His glories, and rendering all sorts of service
to Him. The tongue should always be engaged in chanting the holy name of the Lord,
the  ears  should  be  continuously  engaged  in  hearing  the  Lord’s  glories,  and  the  hands
should be employed in rendering menial service to Him. Even by fully engaging in only
one of the nine processes of devotional service, one can achieve the perfection of life.
Considering this, what actually intelligent and clever person will fail to do so?
PURPORT
Those  who  are  the  most  clever  and  intelligent  will  engage  themselves  in  the
devotional service of the Lord. It is only due to good fortune that a conditioned soul,
who is bewildered on account of material attachment, decides to utilize whatever may
be  in  his  possession  for  the  service  of  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  By  such
dovetailing of one’s material body and possessions in the service of the Lord, one comes
to the platform of eternality.
eña te ‘bhihitaù kåtsno brahma-vädasya saìgrahaù
samäsa-vyäsa-vidhinä devänäm api durgamaù
I  have  thus  described  to  you,  both  briefly  and  in  detail,  the  essence  of  spiritual
knowledge, which is incomprehensible even to the demigods.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
746 Chapter 23
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Lord thus concludes His description of the processes of transcendental
realization.
PURPORT
The  word  devänäm  in  this  verse  not  only  refers  to  the  demigods,  but  to  all  those
who are situated in the mode of goodness. Those who are elevated in this way but still
are not fully surrendered to the Supreme Lord are to be considered on the level of the
demigods.
abhékñëaças te gaditaà jïänaà vispañöa-yuktimat
etad vijïäya mucyeta puruño nañöa-saàçayaù
I  have  repeatedly  spoken  this  knowledge  to  you  within  a  logical  manner.  Anyone
who  properly  understands  this  knowledge  will  become  free  from  all  doubts  and  attain
liberation.
su-viviktaà tava praçnaà mayaitad api dhärayet
sanätanaà brahma-guhyaà paraà brahmädhigacchati
Anyone who carefully considers these clear answers to your questions will attain the
confidential goal of the Vedas—the Supreme Absolute Truth.
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Lord said: I have elaborately replied to your questions. Anyone who
attentively hears these answers will attain the Supreme Brahman, who is the confidential
goal of the Vedas.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Bhakti-yoga
ya etan mama bhakteñu sampradadyät su-puñkalam
tasyähaà brahma-däyasya dadämy ätmänam ätmanä
One who liberally imparts these instructions to My devotees is the bestower of the
Absolute Truth, and to him I give My very self.
COMMENTARY
Although  the  phrase  brahmadäyasya  is  in  the  sixth  dative  case,  it  should  be
understood to be in the fourth dative case, so that it indicates one who gives the Supreme
Brahman to others.
PURPORT
Devotees of the Supreme Lord are well aware of the science of devotional service.
When they mercifully distribute that knowledge to others and thus bring them to the
service of the Supreme Lord, the Lord reciprocates such magnanimity by giving His very
self  to  such  devotees.  On  the  other  hand,  those  who  are  engrossed  in  their  plans  for
material enjoyment cannot possibly achieve such mercy of the Lord.
ya etat samadhéyéta pavitraà paramaà çuci
sa püyetähar ahar mäà jïäna-dépena darçayan
One  who  loudly  recites  this  supreme  knowledge,  which  is  purifying  for  both  the
hearer and the chanter, becomes steadily purified as he reveals Me to others with the lamp
of transcendental knowledge.
PURPORT
Those  who  are  expert  in  the  understanding  of  devotional  service  to  the  Lord  are
able to dissipate the darkness of ignorance with the light of transcendental knowledge.
The conditioned souls are in a contaminated state of existence but when they take to
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
748 Chapter 23
the  Lord’s  service,  they  quickly  become  sanctified.  The  darkness  of  ignorance  cannot
remain in the presence of the sun-like Supreme Personality of Godhead.
ya etac chraddhayä nityam avyagraù çåëuyän naraù
mayi bhaktià paräà kurvan karmabhir na sa badhyate
One who regularly hears My instructions with faith and attention while constantly
engaging  in  My  pure  devotional  service  will  never  become  bound  by  the  reactions  of
karma.
apy uddhava tvayä brahma sakhe samavadhäritam
api te vigato mohaù çokaç cäsau mano-bhavaù
My dear Uddhava, have you fully understood these transcendental insturctions? Has
your illusion and lamentation now been dispelled from your mind?
COMMENTARY
Uddhava’s  lamentation  arose  because  he  thought  himself  to  be  separated  from
Lord Kåñëa. It is understood that Uddhava is an eternal associate of the Lord who was
put into illusion so that this wonderful conversation known as Uddhava-géta could be
spoken. Lord Kåñëa is herein indicating that if Uddhava did not perfectly understand
His instructions, He would happily repeat them. Uddhava is an intimate associate of the
Lord and so this question is somewhat playful in nature. After all, the all-knowing Lord
could understand Uddhava’s perfect understanding of Kåñëa consciousness.
PURPORT
By  achieving  the  Lord’s  mercy,  the  living  entities’  ignorance  in  the  form  of  the
material conception of life is dispelled. In the liberated condition, there is no possibility
of becoming subjected to lust or lamentation.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Bhakti-yoga
naitat tvayä dämbhikäya nästikäya çaöhäya ca
açuçrüñor abhaktäya durvinétäya déyatäm
You should not instruct this knowledge to anyone who is hypocritical, atheistic, or
dishonest, or with anyone who will not listen faithfully, who is not a devotee, or who is
simply not humble.
COMMENTARY
Spiritual knowledge should not be distributed to those who have no faith.
PURPORT
The confidential knowledge of devotional service to the Supreme Lord should not
be  presented  to  non-devotees,  those  who  are  falsely  proud,  cheaters,  those  who  are
arrogant, atheists, those who are faithless, and those who have no interest in hearing
the truth. In this context, one should remember the ninth offense against the chanting
of the holy name of the Lord.
etair doñair vihénäya brahmaëyäya priyäya ca
sädhave çucaye brüyäd bhaktiù syäc chüdra-yoñitäm
This knowledge should be taught to one who is devoid of these faults, who is dedicated
to the welfare of the brähmaëas, and who is kindly disposed, saintly, and pure. And if
çüdräs and women are devoted to the Supreme Lord, they can also be accepted as qualified
to receive these instructions.
COMMENTARY
If  çudras  and  women  have  devotion  for  the  Lord,  they  should  also  be  instructed
about the process of devotional service.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
750 Chapter 23
PURPORT
The  members  of  all  the  four  varëas  can  be  instructed  in  the  confidential
understanding of devotional service if they maintain a condition of purity and honesty.
Indeed, anyone can give up his duties within the varëäçrama society and fully dedicate
himself to the devotional service of the Lord.
naitad vijïäya jijïäsor jïätavyam avaçiñyate
pétvä péyüñam amåtaà pätavyaà nävaçiñyate
When a person who thirsts after the truth gains an understanding of this transcendental
knowledge, he has reached the completion of his education. When someone drinks nectar,
no more thirst will remain.
COMMENTARY
A  pure  devotee  is  fully  satisfied  with  his  engagement  in  the  devotional  service  of
the Lord. Outside of such engagement, he does not desire to cultivate knowledge. And,
even if a pure devotee desires some particular understanding, he will receive dictation
from  the  Lord  within  his  heart.  One  who  knows  the  Supreme  Lord  is  the  knower  of
everything. If one drinks celestial nectar, how can he thirst for something else?
jïäne karmaëi yoge ca värtäyäà daëòa-dhäraëe
yävän artho nåëäà täta täväàs te ‘haà catur-vidhaù
My dear Uddhava, by means of karma, jï äna, yoga, mundane business, political rule,
and the acceptance of tridaëòa, people try to make advancement in the four objectives of
life—religiosity,  economic  development,  sense  gratification,  and  liberation.  But  because
you are My devotee, whatever can be accomplished in these ways, you will very easily
find within Me.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Bhakti-yoga
COMMENTARY
Should  a  devotee  accept  the  processes  of  karma  or  jïäna  if  he  desires  material
advancement  or  liberation?  Here,  the  Lord  says  that  He  awards  the  four  objectives
of  human  life  to  the  devotees  that  desire  them.  I  am  the  goal  of  their  cultivation  of
knowledge. The cultivation of knowledge culminates in liberation, the performance of
fruitive  activities  depends  on  the  principles  of  religiosity,  and  yoga  awards  one  mystic
perfections. All such accomplishments can easily be attained by the mercy of the Lord.
This is confirmed in the Näräyaëéya of the Mokña-dharma, in Çré Mahäbhärata:
yä vai sädhana-sampattiù puruñärtha-catuñöaye
tayä vinä tad äpnoti naro näräyaëäçrayaù
Whatever  among  the  four  goals  of  human  life  can  be  achieved  by  various
spiritual practices is automatically achieved without such endeavors by the person
who has taken shelter of Lord Näräyaëa, the refuge of all persons.
The purport of this verse is that one should not divert his attention to other process
because  one  who  is  devoted  to  the  Supreme  Personality  can  attain  all  the  benefits
derived from the practice of yoga, philosophical speculation, the performance of religious
rituals and sacrifices, the giving of charity, and so on. That is the specific benediction of
devotional service to the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
Because  devotees  obtain  the  perfection  of  yoga  by  their  execution  of  devotional
service, they never consider undergoing various disciplines, such as jïäna-yoga, karma-
yoga, severe austerities, or ritualistic religious performances.
martyo yadä tyakta-samasta-karmä niveditätmä vicikérñito me
tadämåtatvaà pratipadyamäno mayätma-bhüyäya ca kalpate vai
One who gives up all fruitive activities and surrenders unto Me, sincerely desiring to
render service unto Me, achieves liberation from birth and death and while residing in My
supreme abode, shares My opulence.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
752 Chapter 23
COMMENTARY
Uddhava  might  have  said:  “I  have  heard  Your  opinion  on  this  matter  but  what  is
the opinion of Your devotees?” The Lord would reply: “My dear Uddhava, the opinion
of pious persons has been described in the eighteenth chapter, and the opinion of sinful
men  has  been  given  in  the  twenty-second  chapter.  My  devotees  are  truthful,  saintly,
and undisturbed by material duality. A surrendered soul is one who, by the mercy of My
devotee, has given up all varieties of religiosity to engage in My unalloyed service. Such
a surrendered devotee has taken shelter at the lotus feet of a bona fide spiritual master,
who is non-different from Me. The spiritual master initiates his disciple into the chanting
of  Kåñëa  mantras  and  the  disciple  offers  everything  in  his  possession,  including  his
body, mind, and power of speech, for the service of the Lord. When a devotee sincerely
surrenders unto Me, even once, I personally take charge of him. My activities, and the
activities  of  My  devotees,  are  transcendental  and  factual,  having  nothing  to  do  with
Maya, the illusory energy. As a result of his engagement in My service, a devotee comes
to associate with Me as one of My loving associates.”
PURPORT
When  the  conditioned  souls  renounce  fruitive  activities  and  the  cultivation  of
knowledge and surrender to the Supreme Personality of Godhead—it is not that they
will  feel  any  scarcity.  The  Supreme  Lord  is  perfect  and  complete  and  everything  in
relationship with Him is also complete, or in other words, without any deficiency.
´Î¯Ì¸d 3HÌ=
çré-çuka uväca
sa evam ädarçita-yoga-märgas tadottamaùçloka-vaco niçamya
baddhäïjaliù préty-uparuddha-kaëöho na kiïcid üce ‘çru-pariplutäkñaù
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Having been instructed by Lord Çré Kåñëa about the complete
path of yoga, Uddhava, his voice choked due to ecstatic love and his eyes filled with tears,
folded his hands and stood silently, unable to say anything.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Bhakti-yoga
viñöabhya cittaà praëayävaghürëaà dhairyeëa räjan bahu-manyamänaù
kåtäïjaliù präha yadu-pravéraà çérñëä spåçaàs tac-caraëäravindam
O  King,  with  great  patience,  Uddhava  pacified  his  mind,  which  was  agitated  by
ecstatic love. Feeling most grateful to Lord Kåñëa, the greatest hero of the Yadu dynasty,
he bowed down to touch the lotus feet of the Lord with his head and then spoke with
folded hands.
COMMENTARY
Due to fear of impending separation, Uddhava felt very anxious, but just to steady
his mind, he remembered how Çré Kåñëa had bestowed great mercy upon him.
´Î3{H 3HÌ=
çré-uddhava uväca
vidrävito moha-mahändhakäro ya äçrito me tava sannidhänät
vibhävasoù kià nu samépa-gasya çétaà tamo bhéù prabhavanty ajädya
Çré  Uddhava  said:  O  primeval  Lord,  I  was  born  in  the  darkness  of  ignorance  but
by  Your  merciful  association,  my  delusion  is  now  dispelled.  For  one  who  stands  in  the
sunlight, how can cold, darkness, or fear continue to oppress him?
COMMENTARY
Çré  Uddhava  said:  “I  had  fallen  into  the  darkness  of  illusion.  Although  I  am
surrounded by the Yädavas, headed by Çré Kåñëa, I considered Dvärakä to be a limited
and temporary material place.”
In the Third Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Lord Çré Kåñëa revealed the confidential
conclusions of transcendental knowledge to Uddhava, which were unknown to others,
but He withheld the most confidential part, which He has now imparted to him.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
754 Chapter 23
PURPORT
Just as, by the rising of the sun, darkness is automatically vanquished, so when one
takes to the devotional service of the Supreme Lord, the darkness of ignorance cannot
remain. The processes of karma, jïana, and yoga are incapable of entirely removing the
darkness of ignorance.
pratyarpito me bhavatänukampinä bhåtyäya vijïäna-mayaù pradépaù
hitvä kåta-jïas tava päda-mülaà ko ‘nyaà saméyäc charaëaà tvadéyam
As reciprocation for my surrender at Your lotus feet, You have mercifully illuminated
me with transcendental knowledge. What devotee of Yours who has any gratitude at all
could give up the shelter of Your lotus feet and accept another master?
COMMENTARY
Uddhava  said,  “I  have  surrendered  my  body,  soul,  mind,  intelligence,  and  senses
unto  You  and  in  return  You  have  enlightened  me  with  the  knowledge  that  removes
all  darkness  of  ignorance.  My  dear  Lord,  I  am  fully  satisfied  at  every  moment  by  the
realization of Your unfathomable glories. Now, You may do whatever You wish to Your
surrendered servant. You may keep me here or send me wherever You desire. I am ever
grateful  to  You  and  I  simply  wish  to  remain  Your  eternal  servant.  I  have  no  personal
desire to go anywhere, even a holy place of pilgrimage, leaving aside Your lotus feet. I
am happy to reside anywhere as long as I am fully absorbed in Your devotional service.
Whatever You wish me to do—I will carry out Your order.” This is the purport of this
verse.
PURPORT
When one takes shelter of the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, all of the darkness
born of ignorance is dispelled so that one becomes free from all doubts. Such a devotee
accepts the lotus feet of the Lord as his only refuge.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Bhakti-yoga
våkëaç ca me su-dåòhaù sneha-päço däçärha-våñëy-andhaka-sätvateñu
prasäritaù såñöi-vivåddhaye tvayä sva-mäyayä hy ätma-subodha-hetinä
With  a  desire  to  increase  the  population,  You  extended  the  rope  of  My  affection
towards the Däçärhas, Andhakas, Våñëis, and Yädavas. But today, You have cut that rope
with the weapon of transcendental knowledge.
COMMENTARY
Uddhava  might  wonder:  How  can  I  sever  my  affection  for  the  Yädavas  and  go
elsewhere?  He  would  answer  that  as  follows:  I  am  tied  to  the  Yädavas  with  the  rope
of  affection.  My  dear  Lord,  You  expanded  Your  family,  the  Yädavas,  and  have  thus
increased the population, by means of Your own potency. Your family is still expanding
through the agency of Your sons and grandsons. Thus, my social prestige has also spread
in  all  directions.  You  should  now  cut  off  the  rope  of  my  family  affection  and  prestige
with  the  weapon  of  transcendental  knowledge.  Let  me  instead  be  tied  by  the  rope  of
affection to those who relish hearing and chanting Your transcendental names, as well
as descriptions of Your transcendental forms, qualities, and pastimes. Let that affection
remain as my ornament. I wish to remain in Your association, and that of the Yädavas
forever. This is my prayer.
namo ‘stu te mahä-yogin prapannam anuçädhi mäm
yathä tvac-caraëämbhoje ratiù syäd anapäyiné
O greatest of mystic yogis, I offer my obeisances unto You. Please instruct me, who am
surrendered unto You, so that I may have unflinching attachment for Your lotus feet.
COMMENTARY
Uddhava said: O greatest of all mystics, You have so graciously allowed me to realize
Your  transcendental  nature  and  characteristics,  and  thus  have  awarded  me  complete
satisfaction.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
756 Chapter 23
çré-bhagavän uväca
gacchoddhava mayädiñöo badary-äkhyaà mamäçramam
tatra mat-päda-térthode snänopasparçanaiù çuciù
ékñayälakanandäyä vidhütäçeña-kalmañaù
vasäno valkaläny aìga vanya-bhuk sukha-niùspåhaù
titikñur dvandva-mäträëäà suçélaù saàyatendriyaù
çäntaù samähita-dhiyä jïäna-vijïäna-saàyutaù
matto ‘nuçikñitaà yat te viviktam anubhävayan
mayy äveçita-väk-citto mad-dharma-nirato bhava
ativrajya gatés tisro mäm eñyasi tataù param
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: “My dear Uddhava, follow My order and
go to Badrikäçrama. Purify yourself by bathing and performing äcamana with the water
that  has  emanated  from  My  lotus  feet.  Free  yourself  of  all  sinful  reactions  by  having
darçana of the sacred Alakanandä River. Dress yourself in tree bark and eat the fruit
and  roots  that  are  easily  available  in  the  forest.  Thus,  you  should  remain  self-satisfied
and free of all desires, tolerant of all dualities, good-natured, self-controlled, peaceful, and
endowed with transcendental knowledge and realization. With fixed attention, constantly
contemplate  these  instructions  that  I  have  imparted  to  you,  and  thus  assimilate  their
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Bhakti-yoga
essence. Fix your mind and words upon Me, and in this way, you will be able to surpass
the influence of the three modes of material nature and finally come back to Me.
COMMENTARY
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O Uddhava, You are as good as Me and
thus, among all the members of the Yadu dynasty, you are My personal representative. I
had previously declared: Uddhava is not inferior to Me in any way. Therefore, you should
remain  in  this  world,  just  to  preach  My  instructions.  Distribute  this  transcendental
knowledge to everyone. Whatever I wish to accomplish in this world can be done by you.
As I had previously sent you to Vraja, I will now send you to Badarikäçrama. There, the
foremost of sages, Çré Näräyaëa, as well as others, aspire to see Me. Previously, I traveled
to  Mithilä,  and  many  other  places  on  this  earth,  and  satisfied  all  My  devotees  who
desired to see Me, by giving them My darçana and imparting to them transcendental
knowledge. Now, however, I am unable to go to Badarikäçrama. I am now one hundred
and twenty-five years old, so that the time for My disappearance has arrived. You said to
Me, “I am Your surrendered servant and so kindly order me. What should I do?” So, this
is My order. Your name, Uddhava, is suitable because you give pleasure to everyone. Now,
go to Badarikäçrama and give everyone joy by displaying your knowledge, renunciation,
and other sublime characteristics. This is My mission. Indeed, simply by your glance, you
will nullify all the sinful reactions that have become stocked in the river Alkanandä.
After you execute My order, you will return to Me in the spiritual sky.
PURPORT
Instead  of  working  under  the  direction  of  the  three  modes  of  material  nature,  if
one  works  under  the  direction  of  the  spiritual  master  in  devotional  service,  which  is
transcendental  to  the  material  modes,  he  certainly  becomes  qualified  to  attain  the
ultimate  destination.  Others  cannot  go  back  to  Godhead  because  they  try  to  attain
insignificant and temporary material objects.
´Î¯Ì¸d 3HÌ=
çré-çuka uväca
sa evam ukto hari-medhasoddhavaù pradakñiëaà taà parisåtya pädayoù
çiro nidhäyäçru-kaläbhir ärdra-dhér nyañiïcad advandva-paro ‘py apakrame
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
758 Chapter 23
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: After being thus instructed by the supremely intelligent Lord
Çré Kåñëa, Uddhava circumambulated Him and then bowed down to offer his obeisances,
placing his head upon the lotus feet of the Lord. Although Uddhava was free from the
influence of all material dualities, he became afflicted by feelings of separation so that he
drenched the Lord’s lotus feet with his tears.
COMMENTARY
Çukadeva  Gosvämé  said:  After  receiving  instructions  from  Çré  Kåñëa,  Uddhava,
whose heart was always filled with ecstatic love for the Lord, felt great lamentation due
to impending separation and thus shed incessant tears.
su-dustyaja-sneha-viyoga-kätaro na çaknuvaàs taà parihätum äturaù
kåcchraà yayau mürdhani bhartå-päduke bibhran namaskåtya yayau punaù punaù
.
Greatly  fearing  separation  from  the  Lord,  for  whom  he  felt  such  great  affection,
Uddhava  was  distraught,  so  that  he  could  not  give  up  the  Lord’s  association.  Finally,
feeling great agony, he repeatedly bowed down to the Lord, placed His wooden shoes upon
his head, and departed.
COMMENTARY
The  Lord  mercifully  extended  His  lotus  feet  to  Uddhava,  who  clasped  them  with
great  love  and  devotion  and  placed  them  on  his  head.  Thereafter,  Uddhava  left  for
Badarikäçrama,  in  order  to  carry  out  the  mission  of  the  Supreme  Lord.  It  is  said  in
Çrémad-Bhägavatam (3.4.5), that while Uddhava was going to Badarikäçrama, he heard
that  the  Lord  had  traveled  to  Prabhäsa.  Uddhava  then  retraced  his  steps  so  that  he
could find Lord Kåñëa, and it so happened that he came to where the Lord was sitting
alone after the annihilation of the Yadu dynasty. Uddava was once again instructed by
the Lord, and after his transcendental understanding was reawakened, on the order of
the Lord, he again departed for Badarikäçrama.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Bhakti-yoga
tatas tam antar hådi sanniveçya gato mahä-bhägavato viçäläm
yathopadiñöäà jagad-eka-bandhunä tapaù samästhäya harer agäd gatim
Thereafter,  the  exalted  devotee,  Uddhava,  placed  Çré  Kåñëa  upon  the  lotus  of  his
heart and went to Badrikäçrama. By engaging in austerities, he attained the Lord’s eternal
abode, which had been described to him by the only friend of the conditioned souls, Lord
Kåñëa.
COMMENTARY
The word véracandra viçäläà refers to Badarikäçrama. After residing there, Uddhava
attained the eternal abode of the Lord in the spiritual sky, Dvärakä.
ya etad änanda-samudra-sambhåtaà jïänämåtaà bhägavatäya bhäñitam
kåñëena yogeçvara-sevitäìghriëä sac-chraddhayäsevya jagad vimucyate
Thus Lord Kåñëa, whose lotus feet are served by all the great masters of yoga, spoke to
His devotee this transcendental knowledge, which comprises the entire ocean of spiritual
ecstasy. Anyone who receives this narration with great faith and devotion is assured of
liberation in the very near future.
COMMENTARY
If one faithfully hears this conversation between the Lord and His devotee, which is
like an ocean of bliss, he becomes a fit candidate for executing loving devotional service
of  the  Lord.  Indeed,  by  his  association,  the  entire  world  can  become  engaged  in  the
service of the Lord.
PURPORT
By  faithfully  serving  the  devotees  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  one  can  attain  freedom
from material bondage and engagement in the devotional service of the Supreme Lord.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 23
uddhava-gétä
bhava-bhayam apahantuà jïäna-vijïäna-säraà
nigama-kåd upajahre bhåìga-vad veda-säram
amåtam udadhitaç cäpäyayad bhåtya-vargän
puruñam åñabham ädyaà kåñëa-saàjïaà nato ‘smi
I  offer  my  obeisances  unto  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  the  origin  of
everything, Lord Çré Kåñëa. He is the author of the Vedas, and just to destroy His devotees’
fear of material existence, like a bee, He collected the essence of all knowledge and self-
realization and then awarded it to His devotees, who, by His mercy, have drunk it.
COMMENTARY
To conclude this chapter, Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé offers his obeisances to the spiritual
master  of  the  whole  universe,  Çré  Kåñëa.  It  is  Kåñëa  who  churned  the  essence  of  the
Vedas to extract the essence. Other philosophers have also tried to extract the essence
from the Vedic literature, but without knowing the confidential purport of the Vedas,
being devoid of implicit faith in the Supreme Lord. Being the author of the Vedas, it is
the Supreme Lord who understands their true purpose. The Supreme Lord, like a bee,
collected  honey  from  the  garden  of  Vedic  flowers  and  distributed  it  to  His  devotees.
However,  while  favoring  the  devotees,  the  Lord  has  simultaneously  cheated  the  non-
devotee demons. For example, during the churning of ocean, the Lord took the pot of
nectar after assuming the form of Mohiné and then distributed it to the demigods, while
tactfully deceiving the demons. Let us bow down to that Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa.
PURPORT
Çré Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, without beginning and without
end.  As  the  supreme  instructor,  He  removes  the  living  entities’  fear  of  repeated  birth
and death. He mercifully distributes love of Himself, which is the essence of all Vedic
knowledge,  to  all  conditioned  souls  who  are  otherwise  averse  to  His  service.  He  is
the  compiler  of  the  Vedic  literature,  and  He  distributed  its  essence  to  the  swan-like
Vaiñëavas. It is the foremost duty of all living entities to surrender unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, giving up all varieties of religiosity.
Thus  end  the  translation  of  the  twenty-third  chapter  of  the  Uddhava-géta  entitled
“Bhakti-yoga”  with  the  commentaries  of  Çréla  Viçvanätha  Cakravarté  Öhäkura  and
chapter summary and purports by Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura.
End of Uddhava-Gétä
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
appendix
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
gLossary
A
Abhidheya : Activities involved in developing one’s relationship with the Supreme Lord.
Acintyabhedäbheda : Simultaneous oneness and difference.
Açvattha : Banyan tree, considered very holy.
Açviné-kumäras : The twin demigods, who are the controlling deities of the object of
sense perception.
Adhibautika : Miseries of material existence caused by other living entities.
Adhidaivic : Miseries of material existence caused by higher authorities or the demi-
gods.
Adhirüòha mahäbhäva : Severe agony felt due to separation from one’s beloved.
Ädhyätmika : Miseries of material existence caused by one’s mind or body.
Advaya jïäna : The conception of the Supreme Lord as non-dual, one without a
second.
Aëimä-siddhi : First of the eighteen mystic perfections that can be attained by a yogi.
In this perfection, a yogi can become smaller than the smallest.
Agnihotra : One of Vedic sacrifices which a twice-born person must perform after
marriage.
Airävata : Lord Indra’s elephant.
Akåta-droha : A devotee never uses his mind, body or words to perform any act that is
harmful to the welfare of any living entity.
Akiïcana : A devotee is free from possessiveness. He is not eager to enjoy or renounce
anything because he considers everything to be Lord Kåñëa’s property.
Alaìkära : Literary ornaments.
Amäni : A devotee is not proud. Even if he is famous, he does not take it very seriously.
Anäptakäma : The Lord’s merciful reciprocation with His loving devotees of being
unable to achieve His desire without the cooperation of His devotees.
Anartha : Uneccessary habits or unwanted traits that impede spiritual advancement.
Anätmäräma : Being affected by the love of His devotees, the Lord sometimes appears-
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
dependent on the love of His devotees.
Anavadyätmä : A pure devotee is devoid of envy, and never unnecessarily criticizes others.
Aniha : Detached from all worldly activities.
Añöäìga-yoga : Eightfold system of yoga practise.
Añöakäléya-lélä : The eternal eightfold daily pastimes of the Divine Couple.
Anuloma : Mixed marriage systems in Vedic culture. If a man marries a girl belonging
to an inferior caste, that union is termed anuloma.
Anusvära : Nasal vibration pronounced after the fifteen Sanskrit vowels.
Aparäjaya siddhi : The mystic perfection of becoming unconquerable in all respects.
Apramatta : Being cautious, not mad.
Apsaräs : Heavenly damsels.
Äpta-käma : Supreme Lord automatically fulfills all of His own desires.
Asaìklipta : One of three methods of begging alms by the mendicants. This is where-
by one approaches seven houses and is satisfied with whatever he receives.
Ätma-kréòa : An advanced Vaiñëava, constantly enjoying the mellows of loving devo-
tional service and carrying out the mission of the Lord on the earth, and enjoys
life within the internal potency of the Supreme Lord.
Ätma-rata : Being fully satisfied by constant engagement in devotional service.
Ätmäräma : Self satisfied. One finds pleasure only in the self.
Ätmavän : Situtated in one’s eternal constitutional position.
Avadhüta : A careless or mad person. Also an advanced state of spiritual practise.
Avidyä : Ignorance.
Avyakta  : The Lord who is not materially manifest at any stage of cosmic evolution.
B
Båhaspati : Chief priest or the spiritual master of the demigods.
Bahvayana : One of the two categories into which the Vedic scriptures are divided.
Bhagavän : The Supreme Personality of Godhead, complete with six opulence.
Bhägavata dharma : Devotional service to the Lord.
Bhakti-devé : Goddess of devotion.
Bhäva-bhakti : The advance stage of bhakti whereby one experiences loving feelings
towards the Supreme Lord.
Bhümi : Mother earth.
Bhütabhävana : The Lord, who is the benefactor of all living entities.
C
Caitya-guru : The Lord as the spiritual master situated within.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Glossary
D
Dakñina : Instructing others in the knowledge of one’s relationship with the Supreme Lord.
Däna : To give up the mentality of unnecessarily punishing one for his faults.
Dänta : A devotee’s senses are completely under control.
Darça : New moon day when the sun and the moon are in proximity.
Daridra : One who is dissatisfy with life or is poor.
Däsya : The mood of being the Lord’s servant in loving devotional service.
Devatä-käëòa : One of three sections of the Vedas. The Vedas has three divisions.
Dhana : To strictly follow religious principles.
Dhäraëä : Meditation.
Dharma : Occupational duties.
Dhåtimäna : One who is not agitated by the urges of the tongue and genitals.
Dhätu : Truth or element.
Dikñä : Spiritual initiation.
E
Ekäyana : One of two categories by which the Vedas are divided. This category aims
at sole meditation on the Supreme Lord. This is the method adopted by the
topmost devotee of the Lord who firmly believe that chanting the holy names
of the Lord is the only way of achieving the ultimate goal of life.
G
Gabhirätmä : He whose nature is unfathomable.
Gåha-vrata : An attached householder who cannot control his senses.
Garbhädhäna : Puficatory rites performed while a child is in the womb of the mother.
Guëa-bhüta-bhakti : Devotional service mixed with speculative propensities, or per-
formed under the influence of the modes of material nature.
Guëamäyä : Mundane qualitative potency.
Guëébhütä-bhakti : Devotional service that is performed based on the execution of
occupation’s duties.
H
Hariväsara : The appearance day of the Lord.
Hré :  Actual modesty, which is, to be disgusted with abominable activities.
I
Iñöa : Most desirable. The Supreme Lord is the only most desirable object.
Éça : A controller. Also pertains to one who is detached from sense gratification.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
Éçitä : A mystic perfection that enables one to manipulate the sub-potencies of Maya.
Éçitva : The mystic perfection that enables one to exert his influence over the bodies
of others.
J
Jäti-smara : The mystic power that enables one to remember his previous birth.
Jévaçakti : The Potency of the Lord that manifests living entities.
Jévamäyä : The living potency of the living entities.
K
Käma-rüpa : A mystic perfection of the ability to assume any form that one desires,
even the form of a demigod.
Kämair ahata-dhé : A devotee who is not agitated by lusty desires.
Kämavasäyitä : A mystic perfection that enables one to obtain anything he may desire.
Kåpaëa : A miserly person.
Kåpälu : A devotee is always merciful.
Käruëika : A devotee if fully magnanimous to all.
Kävya : Poetic.
Kevala-bhakti : Unalloyed devotional service to the Lord.
Kimpuruñas : A race of monkeys who are almost like human beings.
Kindevas : A race of human beings who are, like the demigods, completely free from
fatigue, sweat and body odor.
Kinnaras : A race of beings who are a little like human. They have either a human
head or human body (but not both) combined with a nonhuman form.
Kriyä : Activities that one performs, usually under the influence of material energy.
Kupatha : The wrong path, which leads to sense gratification and simply bewilders
the mind.
L
Läbha : Greed.
Laghimä : A mystic perfection that enables to become as light as an atom.
M
Mädhukara : A method of begging by a mendicant where he collects little from each
household, just like a honeybee.
Mådu : A devotee whose heart is always gentle.
Mahäntaù : Pure devotees always desire to give Kåñëa conscious happiness to others.
Mahat-tattva : The combined material nature.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Glossary
Mahimä-siddhi : The mystic perfection whereby a yogi meditates upon the total
material existence as a manifestation of the external potency of the Lord and
thus firmly realized that the material creation is not different from the Lord.
By therefore realizing the Lord’s presence in each individual element, the yogi
acquires the greatness of each element.
Maitra : A devotee is friendly to everyone.
Mänada : A devotee gives respect to everyone.
Mano-javaù : A mystic perfection that enables one’s body to follow his mind wher-
ever it goes.
Manomaya : Lord Kåñëa is to be kept within one’s mind.
Märgaçérña : Lunar month that falls between November and December.
Mäyäçakti : Illusory potency.
Mitabhuk : A devotee eats enough only to sustain his body.
N
Niñedha : Regulations.
Niñöhä : Fixed.
Niùsaìga : Without any tinge of karma, jïäna, and so on.
P
Para-käya-praveçanam : The mystic perfection that enables to enter the body of an-
other person.
Pariëämaväda : The philosophy of transformation.
Paurnamäsa : Full moon day.
Pradhäna : The totality of material ingredients.
Pradhänébhütä-bhakti : Devotional service performed according to principles delin-
eated by the Supreme Lord in the scriptures.
Präkpraëita : One of three methods for begging alms. This is a process by which one
establishes regular donors and collects one’s maintenance from them.
Präpti : A mystic perfection by which one gains mastery over everyone’s senses.
Pratiloma : Vedic system of marriage where a man marries a girl of the higher caste.
Priyam : The Lord is the supreme lovable object and He establishes wonderful affec-
tionate relationships with His devotees.
R
Räga-märga : The path of intimate devotion to the Lord.
Rasa : Mellow.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
S
Saàskära : Purificatory rites.
Saìkalpa siddhi : A mystic perfection that enables one to achieve his goal.
Sälokya mukti : Liberation of being able to be on the same planet as the Lord.
Sama : Equal in happiness and distress, as well as in honor and dishonor.
Samadarçana : Equal vision. A learned person sees the equality of all beings.
Sandhiné : The potency of eternal existence.
Sänta : A devotee is always peaceful.
Särñöi : The liberation of achieving the same opulence as the Lord.
Sarvopakäraka : A devotee is always engaged in acts meant for the welfare of others.
Satpatha : True path that leaders to liberation.
Satya-sära : A devotee is always fixed in the truth.
Säyujya mukti : The liberation of merging into the personal effulgence of the Lord.
Sthira :  A devotee is always fixed.
Svacchanda-måtyu : The mystic perfection of the ability to die at will.
Svagata-bheda : The Lord’s relationship with the spiritual nature.
Çåìgära : The intimate loving mood by which devotional service is rendered.
Çäkta : Possessor of the energy. Usually reffered to Lord Shiva.
Çänta-bhakta : A devotee who has attained the first stage of loving association with
the Lord, which is a position of neutrality.
Çänta-rati : The mood of neutrality in the perfection of devotional service.
Çauca : To remain detached from material enjoyment while utilizing everything in the
service of Kåñëa.
Çaurya : To subdue one’s natural thirst for material sense enjoyment.
Çrévatsa : Tuft of hair on the chest of the Lord.
Çuci : Cleanliness and purity.
Çvetadvépa : White island. Spiritual abode of the Lord situated within this material
world.
T
Tattva-vinyäsa : A procedure in Deity worship whereby the Lord is invoked and
established on sanctified ground by the chanting of mantras.
Titikñu : A devotee is always tolerant, even in the midst of adversities.
Titikñä : To tolerate the distress that one is destined to suffer, thinking it to be the Lord’s
mercy, and refraining from feelings of jealousy because of another’s happiness.
Trikälajïatä siddhi : The mystic perfection that enables one to know past, present,
and future, as well as knowing about the birth and death of all people.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Glossary
V
Vastusiddhi : When the subtle body is dissolved at the time of spiritual perfection.
Vätsalya : Parental relationship with the Lord.
Vätsäyana : The author of kama sutra.
Viçiñöädvaita : This philosophy addresses the living entities as cit and the material
world as acit. This was propounded by Sri Ramanuja.
Viçuddha-sattva : Pure existence of the Lord, free from the modes of material nature.
Vidhi : Rules, which are in regard to the activities of the living entities that are
always good.
Vidyä : Knowledge.
Vijätéya-bheda : The living entities’ relationship with the material nature.
Vijïäna : Wise or realisation of knowledge.
Vivartaväda : The impersonal philosophy that says that the Absolute Truth is un-
changeable, and that this material world is false.
Vratadharaëa : The firm determination to engage in the Lord’s service.
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
Chapter 1
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
generaL Index
A
Abhijit, 313
Absolute Truth
acintya-bhedäbheda and, 153
aspects of, three, 165, 587–88
energies of, 664
goodness and, 288
impersonal conception of, 105–6, 459–60,
467, 693
Jaimini’s philosophy and, 132
Kåñëa as, 150, 180, 240, 302, 318, 395
modes of nature and, 709
as one, 237, 413
understanding, 2–3, 122, 275, 305, 406
Acintya-bhedäbheda, 42, 153, 508, 521
Activities, prescribed/prohibited, 16–17
Adhiruòha mahäbhäva, 198, 199
Advaya jïäna, 413–14
Aggressors, 36
Agni, 309, 574
Agnihotra, 367, 368
Air, 186
Airävata, 310
Aitareya Upanisad, 114
Akrüra, 197–98
Alakanandä River, 756, 757
Analogy
aquatic and devotee, 296
arrows and harsh words, 543–44
ass and Purüravä, 638
ax and knowledge, 211
bee and greedy person, 72
bee and intelligent person, 69
bee and Lord, 760
bee and saintly person, 70
bee and self-realized soul, 68
bee and yogi, 291
betel nuts and sense gratification, 111
bird and soul, 445, 446
birds and soul/Supersoul, 155–57, 209, 210
blind well and material body, 24
boat and detachment, 556
boat and devotee, 652
boat and human body, 447
breezes and Lord’s instructions, 447
businessman and fruitive worker, 488, 489
cloth and universe, 208, 209
cow and Vedic study, 164
disease and mind, 716
dream and conditioned state, 157–58
dream and material activities, 719
dream and material existence, 703–4
drunkard and self-realized soul, 238–39
eating and taking shelter of Lord, 459
echo and material world, 699
elephant and avadhüta brähmaëa, 32, 33
fire and body, 219
fire and devotional service, 260, 264–65,
fire and knowledge, 129
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
fire and Lord, 205
fire and lust, 640
fire and material desires, 646
fire and saintly person, 44–45
fire and serving devotees, 651–52
fire and soul, 47, 126–27, 128, 531, 577–78,
fire and Supersoul, 46
fire and Vedic sacrifices, 486
firewood and body, 702
fog and material desires, 287
food grains and devotee, 653
frog’s croaking and mundane songs, 3
fruit and body, 727
Ganges and pure devotee, 384
Ganges and Vedic knowledge, 250
gold and Lord, 708
gold and soul, 126, 264–65
helmsman and guru, 447
horse and mind, 450
house and body, 84
innocent child and self-realized soul, 20
Lord and devotee, 653
medicine and hearing and chanting about
Lord, 265–66
moon and soul, 46–47
moon and Supersoul, 386
moth and sense enjoyer, 67–68
mountain and saintly person, 37–38
nipples on goat’s neck and non-devotional
processes, 188
ocean and saintly person, 65–66
physician and guru, 716
pot and transcendentalist, 322
prisoner and conditioned soul, 134
python and devotee, 64
religion and devotee, 653
river and gopés, 199–200
seed and body, 112–13
senses and wives, 113
ship and Lord, 350
sky and Lord, 714
sky and self-realized soul, 41–42
sky and soul, 42–43, 144
snow and soul, 577, 578
soil and Lord, 207
son and bodily identification, 528
spider and Lord, 108, 494
sun and devotee, 48, 654, 700
sun and devotional service, 287, 754
sun and Lord, 274, 710, 748
sun and realization, 720–21
sun and self-realized soul, 713, 714
sun and soul, 48
sun and Supersoul, 520, 721
sun ray and soul, 274, 721
sweet and heaven, 483, 484
touchstone and human body, 447
touchstone and Lord, 622
travelers and family members, 355
tree and body, 155–57, 208, 209, 445, 446
tree and lazy person, 483
tree and material existence, 209
tree and soul, 727
trees and philosophies, 250
umbrella and Lord’s feet, 408
warrior and devotee, 259
water and saintly person, 43–44
wealthy person and devotee, 254
wind and self-realized soul, 40–41
wood and body, 126, 128
wood and disciple, 129
wood and guru, 129
wood and Vedas, 205–6
Ananta, 311
Anarthas
cause of, 538, 743
devotee association and, 251
liberation as, 554
material attachments as, 484, 485
material enjoyment as, 554
prosperity and, 252
self-control and, 77
from wealth, 550, 551
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
General Index
Anger, 43, 109, 162, 481, 482, 646
Aìgirä, 249
Animal slaughter, 139, 487–88
Aëimä-siddhi, 280, 282
Annihilation, cosmic, 104, 600–603
Antarikña, 602
Aparäjaya siddhi, 296
Arcana, 662
Arjuna, 3, 5, 305–6, 316
Arrow maker, 100
Aryamä, 310
Ascetics, 22, 439
Asita, 314
Añöäìga-yoga, 100, 240
Asuras, 618
Açviné-kumäras, 521
Atala, 594
Atheists, 250, 523
Atri, 249
Attachment, material
aversion to Lord and, 524
byproducts of, 481, 482
devotee and, 649
devotee association and, 192
devotional service and, 103, 381
forgetfulness of Lord and, 50–51
by householder, 354–56, 358–59
intelligence and, 112
karma-käëòa and, 484–85
Lord’s message and, 81
moroseness from, 94
offenses to holy name and, 716
pigeon story and, 49–58
by Purüravä, 635–36
sannyäsa and, 380–82
suffering from, 716
See also Desire, material; Detachment;
Sense gratification
Austerity
by brahmacäré, 336
by brähmaëa, 343, 347
defined, 424, 425, 609
by devotees, 187, 347, 418
power from, 44
Satya-yuga and, 330
by Uddhava, 759
by vänaprastha, 369, 392
Avadhüta brähmaëa
appearance of, 32
on attachment, 94
on body, material, 112
on creation/annihilation, 104–5, 106
on distress, 63
happiness of, 33
on happiness, 63, 96
on human body, 115
on living alone, 103
on Lord, 105
on mind, 101, 108, 109
qualities of, 32, 33
as self-realized soul, 116
on senses, 113
spiritual masters of, 34, 35, 36, 94, 117
arrow maker, 101–2
body, 110–11, 112–13
child, 96
deer, 74
earth, 36
elephant, 71, 72
fire, 44–47
fish, 75
honeybee, 68, 69–70, 72
honey thief, 73
kurara bird, 95
life air, 38
moon, 46
moth, 67–68
mountain, 37
ocean, 65–66
pigeon, 49–58
python, 64, 65
sky, 41, 42
snake, 104
spider, 108
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
sun, 48
tree, 37
unmarried girl, 97, 98, 99
wasp, 108–9
water, 43
wind, 39, 40
See also Piìgalä
on understanding Lord, 117
Yadu inquires from, 31–33
Yadu pleases, 34
on yoga practice, 100
Avanti brähmaëa, 580
abuse of, 560–63
on bodily identification, 572
chanting song of, 582
character of, 545–46
detachment by, 548, 556–57, 558
devotional service by, 579–80
on greed, 550
on happiness/distress, 565, 572, 574–78
on human life, 552
lamentation by, 554–55
on mind, 569, 571
on misers, 549
on modes of nature, 566
prayer to demigods by, 557–58
steadfastness by, 564
on suffering, 574
on Supersoul, 567
wandering by, 559
on wealth, 550–52, 554
wealth lost by, 547–48
B
Badarikäçrama, 4, 6, 14, 206, 756, 757, 758, 759
Bala, 676
Balaräma, Lord, 4, 5, 11, 183, 197, 198
Bali Mahäräja, 14, 194, 195, 316, 732, 733
Bäëäsura, 194, 195
Barley, 311
Beauty, 427
Begging
by brahmacäré, 339
by brähmaëa, 375
honeybee analogy and, 68, 69–70
methods of, 375
purification via, 380
by sannyäsé, 374–75
Bhagavad-gétä
on abominable actions by devotee, 110,
463, 259
on action, 123
on conditioned soul, 159
on determination, 564
on earth and Kåñëa, 316
on equal vision, 15, 739
on faith, 441
on intelligence, 122
on Kåñëa
descent of, 5
energies of, 153
guidance from, 734
knowing, 6
sacrifices and, 489–90
understanding, 167, 402
as Lord’s mercy, 409
on modes of nature, 141
on Supersoul, 566
on transcendental knowledge, 5
on transcendental stage, 168
on tree of material existence, 155–56
Uddhava-gétä and, 3, 7
on yogi, 425
Bhagavän, 166, 286, 314, 587
Bhakti-devé, 99
Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu, 175, 176, 294, 350,
357, 459
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thäkura, 7–8,
11n.1
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda, A. C.,
2–3
Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura, 77–78, 294
Bhakti-yoga. See Devotional service to Lord
Bharata, 145
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
General Index
Bhäva, 77
Bhaviçya Puräëa, 368
Bhéñma, 410, 411
Bhågu, 248–49, 309, 659
Bhüloka, 593, 594
Bhuvarloka, 593, 594
Bilvamaëgala Öhäkura, 297
Birth, 527, 533–34, 663
Bodily concept of life
bondage via, 128, 141, 232
conditioned/liberated states and, 157–58
destruction of, 458
father-son analogy and, 528
fear from, 697–98
giving up, 532–33
I/mine mentality and, 572, 581
material existence via, 128, 703
misconceptions from, 167
modes of nature and, 231, 607
offenses and, 572
as temporary illusion, 406
tolerance and, 563
Uddhava on, 24
Body, material
absorption in Lord and, 718
attachment to, 81, 112–13
attraction to, 642–43
composition of, 644
demise of, 112–13
fire analogy and, 47
gopés and, 199
as guru, 110–11
happiness/distress and, 702
as home, 428, 429
house analogy and, 84
as illusory, 405
life air analogy and, 38
maintaining, 64–65
modes of nature and, 219
moon analogy and, 47
mystic perfections and, 279, 280
Piìgalä on, 84
proprietor of, 643, 644
pure devotee and, 291, 383–84
self-realized soul and, 718–19
sky analogy and, 41
soul distinct from, 126–27, 128, 129, 713
soul’s aloofness from, 42
sun analogy and, 48
Supersoul and, 386
surrender to, 239
transformation of, 412, 529–30, 532
tree analogy and, 208, 209
types of, 29
wood analogy and, 126–27, 128
See also Bodily concept of life; Human
body
Body, spiritual, 109, 265, 291, 696
Brahmä
creation and, 210, 593
death and, 139
Deity worship and, 659
fear of time by, 140
Haàsa appears to, 225–26
Haàsa’s departure and, 243
intelligence and, 521
as Kåñëa’s representation, 309, 312, 313
Kåñëa’s descent and, 11
Lord in post of, 315
Maya and, 25
mystic perfection of, 285
Rämacandra and, 732
Sanaka’s inquiries and, 225
Uddhava and, 5, 256
varnäçrama and, 393
Vedas and, 204
Vedic knowledge and, 247, 325–26, 328
yoga and, 224
Brahma-bandhu, 547–48
Brahmacäré, 336–41, 344–45, 392
Brahma-gäyatré, 17
Brahmaloka, 341, 619, 687
Brähma-muhürta, 218
Brahman, impersonal
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
as aspect of  Absolute Truth, 165, 587–88
happiness from, 408
as jïänés’ goal, 742
kämävasäyitä-siddhi and, 287
as Kåñëa’s effulgence, 403
love for Kåñëa and, 199
source of, 708
Brähmaëas
celibacy by, 343
fire sacrifice by, 368
guidance from, 346
Kåñëa worshipped by, 303
as Kåñëa’s representation, 311
Lord’s reciprocation with, 350
maintenance by, 347, 349, 352, 375
material enjoyment and, 347–48
occupations of, 346
purity of place and, 472–73
qualities of, 333
stealing from, 689–90
worshipping, 185, 186
Brähmaëas’ wives, 194, 195
Breath control, 725
Båghu, 117
Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad, 709
Båhaspati, 312, 543, 659
C
Caitanya, Lord
chanting Lord’s names and, 630
on devotional service, 568
example by, 103
happiness from, 255
humility and, 385–86, 539, 740
as Kåñëa, 25
on love for Lord, 263
oneness-difference philosophy and, 153,
renunciation and, 21, 481
separation mood and, 92
tolerance and, 38, 385–86, 539, 544, 740
varnäçrama and, 611
Våndävana and, 290–91, 566
Caitanya-candrämåtaà, Çré, 254–55
Caitanya-caritämåta, Çré
on devotional service, 470, 559–60
on living entities, 145–46
on renunciation, 481
on sense control, 75
on varnäçrama, 382
on Våndävana, 290–91, 566
Caëòa, 676
Cäraväka, 252
Cäturmäsya, 367, 368
Causal Ocean, 593
Celibacy, 337, 340, 341, 343
Chanting Lord’s names
bhakti process and, 418
ekäyana worship and, 288
faith and, 418
humility/tolerance and, 539, 740
impersonalists and, 171
Lord manifests from, 206
Lord worshipped by, 689
lust destroyed by, 725
material existence and, 370
materialists and, 171
modes of nature and, 630
offenses and, 716
pure devotion via, 187
purification via, 265
realization via, 452
by second-class devotee, 665
tongue controlled by, 77
Charity, 73, 346–47, 424, 425
Cheaters, 158
Child, 96
Citraketu, 16, 125, 463
Cleanliness, 178, 424, 425, 426, 736
Compassion, 425, 427, 609
Conditioned souls
activities and, 128, 159
creation and, 508, 590, 599
devotees shelter for, 652–53
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
General Index
failure by, 121
fear by, 142–43
forgetfulness by, 46
independence and, 132
Kåñëa’s opulences and, 320
material hankering by, 95
material manifestations and, 208
material nature and, 107
material world composed of, 596
mind drags, 525
moth analogy and, 67–68
perception of Lord by, 143
phases of consciousness and, 235
satisfaction of, 114–15
Supersoul unseen by, 304
time factor and, 89, 90
transmigration of
activities and, 718
birth and, 527
via bodily identification, 534–35
body types and, 115, 705
cause of, 524
forgetfulness and, 526–28
hypothetical perception of, 529–30
mind and, 525–28
modes of nature and, 141, 535
passion mode and, 619–20
proprietorship and, 125
Uddhava’s questions on, 144, 145
Vedic knowledge and, 248
See also Attachment, material; Bodily
concept of life; Desire, material;
Illusion; Materialists
Controller, 427, 429
Cows, 185, 186
Creation
air and, 107
Brahmä and, 593–94
conditioned souls and, 508, 590, 599
dormant stage of, 105
elements and, 512
false ego and, 591–92
Lord cause of, 512, 598–99
Lord’s glance and, 106, 511, 590
mahat-tattva and, 106, 590
modes of nature and, 107
of planetary systems, 593–94
species and, variety of, 249
spider analogy and, 104–5, 108
universal egg and, 592
Criticism, 693–95, 696
D
Dakña, 310
Daëòa, 374
Daëòakäraëya, 195
Dantavakra, 198
Darça, 367, 368
Daçaratha, 195
Dattätreya, 87, 145
Death
by devotee, 14, 109
forgetfulness and, 526–27
happiness and, 134–35, 138, 139
observation and, 533–34
Deep sleep, 230, 235, 236–37, 527, 709–10
Deer, 74
Deity form of Lord
bathing, 668–69
devotional process and, 182–83, 184
donations to, 687
as incarnation of Lord, 685
installing, 687, 688
items to offer, 670, 671
movable/immovable, 667–68
stealing from, 689, 690
temporary/permanent, 667–69
varieties of, eight, 667
Deity worship
enjoying mentality and, 452
faith and, 683–84
festivals and, 686–87
guru and, 664
hearing/chanting and, 682–83
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
level of devotion and, 669, 670, 671
prayers/obeisances and, 683–84
procedure for, 663, 666, 670
äsana and, 675
bathing, 677, 679
decorating Lord and, 678
exalted personalities and, 675–77
food offerings and, 678–79
items to offer, 678
after meal, 682
purification, 671–74
purification via, 664
quality of paraphernalia and, 669
results of, 675, 687–88
sages recommend, 659
on special days, 679
temple construction and, 686, 687
Demigods
assault and, 574
Avanti brähmaëa and, 547, 557–58
benedictions by, 556
as conditioned souls, 25
cosmic annihilation and, 601
creation of, 592
Deity worship and, 676
fear of time by, 140
fire sacrifice and, 681
goodness mode and, 618
guru represents, 338
happiness/distress and, 574
interdependence of, 520
Kåñëa’s return to Vaikuëöha and, 11
as limited, 26
Lord shelter of, 105
Maya and, 25
mind and, 570
Mohiné and, 760
mystic perfections and, 299
Piìgalä and, 89
prayer to Kåñëa by, 3–4
pure devotees as, 654
sannyäsés and, 372
self-satisfaction and, 19
stealing from, 689
as temporary, 86
transcendentalists and, 716, 717
Vedic literatures for, 435
worshipping, 25, 136, 142, 394, 415, 489–90
Desire, material
anarthas caused by, 743
Brahman liberation and, 287
celibacy and, 343
devotee and, 162, 177–78, 343–44, 444, 559
devotional service and, 287, 457, 458, 462
distress from, 586
happiness and, 96–97
hell and, 442
Kåñëa’s pastimes and, 170
liberated soul and, 161
modes of nature and, 220
passion mode and, 616–17
prayer and, 304
pure devotee and, 255, 258
räsa dance and, 293
Säìkhya philosophy and, 586
saintly person and, 174
sense control and, 221, 646
sense objects and, 715
steadiness and, 376
suffering from, 91, 92, 639
tree analogy and, 209–10
See also Attachment, material;
Detachment
Detachment
by Avanti brähmaëa, 548, 556–57, 558
body teaches, 111
from body, 445–46
bondage and, 238
by brähmaëas, 349
defined, 609
by devotee, 446
via devotee’s association, 647–48
via devotional service, 168, 188, 232, 238,
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
General Index
by disciple, 125
evidence and, 414
failure and, 121
fire analogy and, 44–45
goodness mode and, 616
happiness and, 379
via hopelessness, 447
by householder, 354, 356
Jaimini philosophy and, 132
by liberated soul, 163
liberation and, 462
Lord’s mercy and, 87
via offering activities to Lord, 167
penance and, 371
by Piìgalä, 80–81, 87, 88
prescribed duties and, 455
by Purüravä, 640
real, 420
regulative principles and, 440
self-realization and, 712
of self-realized soul, 161, 633
self-satisfaction and, 640–41
sense control and, 448
sense engagement and, 160
suffering and, 88
sun analogy and, 48
by vänaprastha, 370
wind analogy and, 39–41
by Yadu, 118
See also Renunciation
Determination, 564
Devadatta, 145
Devaké, 14
Devala, 314
Devotees of Lord
abominable activity by, 110, 259, 463
activities of, 169
arguments and, mundane, 384
association and, bad, 376–77, 715
association with
by demons, 195
detachment via, 647–48
devotional service via, 195, 196, 197, 326
faith via, 438, 440
fire analogy and, 652
hearing/chanting about Lord and, 649
Lord’s abode attained via, 194
Lord’s association via, 195
quarrel and, 99, 100
separatism and, 624
spiritual world attained by, 170–71
austerities by, 187, 418, 347
boat analogy and, 652
criticism of, 468
defined, 622
detachment by, 22, 23, 446
devotion to, 351
duality and, 387
duties of, 126
equal vision by, 463, 700
first-class, 665
four goals and, 581, 750–51
happiness of, 377
humility by, 548, 740, 741
intelligence and, 122
Kali-yuga and, 13
Kåñëa’s opulences and, 320
knowledge from, 654
Lord maintains, 347, 744
Lord’s abode attained by, 464
Lord’s satisfaction aim of, 51
loving exchanges by, 377
material advancement and, 296
material affection and, 15
material attachment by, 23
material desires and, 162, 343–44, 444, 728
materialists and, 389
mercy of, 582
mystic perfections and, 297
mystic yoga and, 727–28
ocean analogy and, 66
philosophies and, various, 504, 505–6
piety/impiety and, 462, 463, 464
pseudo, 716
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
purification from, 43
python analogy and, 64
qualities of, 43–44, 176, 648–49, 650, 752
regulative duties and, 388–89
religious principles for, 329
renunciation by, 48
residence of, 104, 737
second-class, 664–65
self-conception by, 18
sense gratification and, 259, 455–56, 559
serving, 170, 403, 651–52
as shelter, 652–53
speech of, 373
steadiness by, 38
sun analogy and, 48
symptoms of, 419
third-class, 685
tolerance by, 38, 539, 540, 740, 741
understanding Lord by, 180
Vedic rituals and, 121, 382, 384
violence and, 373
vision of, 15, 19, 89, 737
as well-wisher, 654
worshipping, 340, 417
See also Pure devotee
Devotional service to Lord
activities of, 218–19
association and, bad, 632
via association of devotees, 195, 196, 197
in attachment, 737
by Avanti brähmaëa, 579–80
body and, material, 111, 112
categories of, 326
death and, 439, 736
detachment and, 129, 238
direct, 391
dream state and, 233
eating and, 387–88
eating analogy and, 459
ecstatic symptoms from, 263–64
as exclusive goal, 116
faith and, 169, 438, 439
false ego destroyed by, 459
festival days and, 737
fruitive activities and, 123
giving up, 402
good/bad conceptions and, 470
goodness mode and, 215
guru fixed in, 390
happiness from, 254, 379, 408–9
happiness/distress and, 579
heaven/hell and, 443–44
human body and, 628, 633
ignorance dispelled by, 754
illusion dispelled via, 660
impediments to, 102, 385
inauspiciousness destroyed by, 726
jïäna and, 738
Kåñëa satisfied by, 260–61
Kåñëa understood via, 30, 167, 402
knowledge and, 117, 400, 409, 420, 458–60,
622, 724, 750
liberation via, 107, 110, 141, 751
as life’s goal, 303
limbs of, 182–84
Lord attained via, 170, 261, 395, 688
Lord controlled by, 193
Lord revealed via, 46
Lord’s mercy and, 440
loss from, 742, 743, 744
love for Lord via, 106, 350, 745
material desires and, 92, 287, 381, 457, 458,
462, 581
material world and, 711
meditation and, 274–75
by mercy of guru/Kåñëa, 560
mind control and, 102, 448–49, 450, 452,
mind purified by, 230
mind’s focus and, 645
mind’s functions and, 646
mixed, 175, 188, 202–3, 443, 467
modes of nature and, 150, 617, 627–28,
629–30, 715
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
General Index
motivation and, 743, 744
mystic perfections and, 287, 290, 292,
298–99
neglecting, 553
occupational duty and, 394
paths of elevation and, 404, 436–37, 460–
61, 497
penance and, 369
perfection via, 745
Piìgalä and, 82, 86
pure, 6, 7, 175, 176, 187, 188
purification via, 261–67, 288, 747–48
purpose of, 689
Purüravä and, 637
qualified recipients of, 438, 749
at Rädhä-kuëòa, 492
as reality, 719
regulative, 737
religious principles and, 420
remembering Lord and, 736
renunciation via, 396, 415, 458–60
sannyäsa and, 560
in Satya-yuga, 329
scriptures on, listed, 294
sense control and, 77
sense engagement and, 17
sense gratification and, 85, 122, 123, 167,
sinful reactions and, 260, 261, 262, 453–54
sins/offenses and, 89
spiritual identity and, 404
spiritual world attained via, 595
as supreme gain, 427
teaching, 747, 749
as ultimate goal, 189, 251, 568, 650, 651
varnäçrama and, 120, 349, 357, 396
Vedas’ purpose and, 495–96
Vedic sacrifices and, 496
via worshipping Lord, 187
See also Chanting Lord’s names; Hearing
and chanting about Lord
Dharma-vyädha, 194, 195
Dhruva, 109, 408
Disciple, 124–25, 129
Disciplic succession, 12, 250
Discrimination, 482–83, 609
Distress. See Suffering
Dreaming, 230, 235, 236–37, 527, 528, 709–10
Duality, 16, 695, 696, 722–23
Durgä, 676–77
Durvasa Muëi, 4
Dvärakä, 12, 753, 759
E
Earth, 36–37, 185, 186
Eating
by brahmacäré, 339
endeavoring for, 64
fish analogy and, 75
goodness mode and, 216
health and, 387
honeybee analogy and, 68, 69–70
impediments from, 38–39
modes of nature and, 624–25
regulating, 387–88
saintly person and, 174, 175
by sannyäsé, 375–76
by vänaprastha, 364, 366
Education, 427, 428
Ekädaçé, 182, 183, 418, 424, 441, 452, 679
Elements
creation of, 512, 592, 601
five gross, 471
numbers of, various, 411–12, 501–5, 506,
507, 510–11, 513–15
soul’s identity and, 713
Uddhava’s inquiry on, 501
universal egg and, 592
Elephant, 71–72
Envy
devotee and, 177
disciple and, 124
as enemy, 646
enmity and, 95–96
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
by fruitive workers, 176–77
guru and, 665
ignorance mode and, 621
by impersonalists, 176
Lord’s order and, 440
saintly person and, 174, 175
sannyäsé and, 392
Supersoul and, 386
worshipping Lord and, 742
Equal vision, 15, 163, 177, 376, 424, 463, 738–
39, 740
Evidence, four types of, 414–15
F
Faith
activities without, 441
chanting Lord’s names and, 418
defined, 609
Deity worship and, 683–84
by devotee association, 438, 440
in devotional service, 439
via hearing and chanting, 170
in Lord’s pastimes, 417
modes of nature and, 624
requirement of, 169, 189–90
False ego
activities and, 159
bondage due to, 232
as cause of illusion, 522
conquering, 706–7
cosmic annihilation and, 601, 602
creation and, 107, 522, 590, 591–92
destroying, 725
devotional service and, 459
experiences of, 705
faith and, 624
forms of, 706
function of, 207
happiness/distress and, 578–79
influence of, 401
as Kåñëa’s representation, 317
knowledge and, 235–36
präpti-siddhi and, 284
Rudra and, 521
suffering and, 705–6
surrender to Lord and, 24
Family life. See Householders
Fasting, 76, 77, 183, 418
Fear, 43, 109, 140, 142, 201–2, 385, 697–98
Festivals, 182–83, 737
Fire, 44–45, 185, 186
Fish, 75
Fool, 427, 428
Forefathers, 435
Fruitive activities
attachment to, 717, 718
auspiciousness and, 484
conditioned soul and, 159
devotee association and, 651
devotional service and, 123, 401, 750, 751
distress and, 576–77
fear and, 142
happiness and, 132, 139, 576–77
ignorance and, 154, 754
Jaimini philosophy and, 131, 132
jïänés and, 718
liberation and, 484–85
Lord awards results of, 595, 596
mind formed by, 525
modes of nature and, 140, 663
paramahaàsa and, 384
passion and, 509
penance and, 365, 369
self-realization and, 122
soul’s transmigration and, 524
temporary results from, 415
wise person and, 717, 718
worship methods and, 661
yoga and, 123
Fruitive workers
animal slaughter and, 487–88
destination of, 595
envy by, 176–77
expectations of, 490
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
General Index
Kåñëa objective of, 307
knowledge and, 492
waste by, 488–89
worshipping Lord and, 489–90
G
Gajendra, 194, 195
Gambling, 218
Gandharvas, 137, 635
Ganges, 32, 33, 311, 384, 475
Garbhädhäna saàskära, 335, 336
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, 593
Garuòa, 195, 310, 676, 677
Garuòa Puräëa, 478
Gauräìga-smaraëa-maëgala, Çré, 294
Gautamiya-tantra, 661–62
Gäyatré mantra, 309, 336, 337, 662, 666, 673
Gétäs, 3
Good/bad qualities
devotees and, 463, 468
devotional service and, 470
effect of, 475
list of, 427
need for distinguishing, 469–70
of objects, 474–75
places and, 472–73
purification methods and, 476–78
relativity of, 475–76, 479–80
of time, 473–74
Uddhava’s inquiry on, 433, 468
Vedas and, 471
Goodness, mode of
conquering, 629
detachment and, 616
determination in, 564
devotional service and, 215
heaven and, 427, 428
irreligion and, 216
Kåñëa’s representations and, 315
knowledge and, 218–19, 507
meditation and, 279
mind control and, 449
mystic perfections and, 287–88, 292–93
passion/ignorance conquered by, 629
pure, 619, 629–30
qualities of, 608, 609, 612, 614
religious principles and, 218
strengthening, 215
Vedic knowledge and, 472
Goodness, pure, 214, 215–16
Gopäla-täpani Upaniñad, 157, 458
Gopés
association of devotees and, 194, 195
following, 201
Kåñëa’s love for, 256, 732
love for Kåñëa by, 197–200
lust and, 639
as paramours, 200
rasa of, 196
separation from Kåñëa by, 197–98
status of, 492
time perception by, 198
Uddhava and, 256–57
Govardhana Hill, 196
Govinda-lélämåta, Çré, 294
Greed, 32, 72–73, 550, 617, 646
Guru. See Spiritual master
Gurukula, 336, 340
H
Haàsa, Lord, 328
appearance of, 225–26
on body, material, 239
departure of, 243
on devotional service, 233
on false ego, 232
on Himself, 240–41
on illusion, 233, 234, 235–36, 237–38
on intelligence, 230–31
on material manifestations, 228
on mind and sense objects, 229–30
on phases of consciousness, 235, 236
qualities of, 241–42
on Sanaka’s inquiries, 227–28
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
Satya-yuga and, 330
on self-realized soul, 238
Haàsa-gétä, 374
Hanumän, 194, 195, 314, 732
Happiness
brähmaëas>by, 347
Caitanya gives, 255
cause of
demigods as, 574
false ego as, 578–79
karma as, 576–77
mind as, 565, 572–73, 581, 587
planets as, 576
soul as, 574–75
time as, 577–78
control of, 133
death and, 134–35, 138
defined, 427, 428
of devotee, 377, 728
from devotional service, 86, 254, 379,
408–9, 732
duality and, 387
dust from pure devotee and, 257
endeavoring for, 63
experience of, 702
from family life, 53
fruitive activities and, 132, 139
goodness mode and, 614
on heavenly planets, 135–38, 415
householder and, 354
impediments to, 135
internal/external, 630
Jaimini philosophy and, 132
liberated state and, 155
Lord awards, 83
in Lord’s association, 253
material desires and, 91, 96–97
modes of nature and, 625
opinions on, 251
by Piìgalä, 80
of pure devotee, 258
qualities resulting in, 254
from renunciation, 95
retarded fool/transcendentalist and, 96
from sense gratification, 253, 410
via sense/mind control, 379
transcendental, 95, 625, 630, 712
tree analogy and, 210
types of, 63
Hari-bhakti-viläsa, 368
Harivaàça, 195
Harsh speech, 543–44, 560
Haöha-yoga, 274, 275, 292
Hearing and chanting about Lord
auspiciousness via, 418
devotional service via, 650, 651
material desires and, 170
perfection and, 418
purification via, 265–66, 649
regulative principles and, 440
Heaven
devotee and, 460
goodness and, 427, 428, 619, 620
happiness in, 135–38, 415
human life and, 443
king and, 351
life’s goal and, 483–84
Lord’s abode and, 11
mystic perfections and, 292–93
pure devotee and, 255
as temporary, 140
Vedas’ purpose and, 485–86
worshipping Lord and, 442
Hell, 138, 427, 428–29, 442, 443–44, 620
Heroism, 424
Himälayas, 311
Hiranyakaçipu, 18
Hlädiné, 150, 248
Holi, 183
Holy places, 182, 737
Honeybee, 68–70, 72–73
Honey thief, 72, 73
Householders
attachment by, 18, 96, 354–56, 358–59
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
General Index
charity and, 73
devotional service and, 394, 649
duties of, 353, 392
honeybee analogy and, 68
Lord’s satisfaction and, 357
money of, 354
pigeon story and, 49–58
sannyäsa and, 357
sex and, 393, 394
Human body
advantage of, 29, 59, 115, 116, 552–53, 628,
632, 633
aspiration for, 443–44
attainment of, 447
boat analogy and, 447
capabilities of, 28
complacency and, 444
creation of, 114
death and, 445–46
discrimination power by, 479
liberation and, 447
misusing, 552
purpose of, 580
searching for Kåñëa and, 30
Humility, 385, 539, 548, 563, 740, 741, 749
I
Ignorance, mode of
hell as, 427, 428–29
bondage via, 152, 157, 153–54
influence of, 615–16, 617
Maya and, 152
qualities of, 608, 609, 612
Illusion
activities and, 536–37
aversion to Lord and, 53, 83
cause of, 538
of control, 143
devotional service dispels, 660
dream analogy and, 158, 234
duality and, 695, 696, 722–23
as enemy, 646
false ego and, 590
knowledge dispels, 633
material desires and, 15–16, 18
material existence as, 536, 698–99
phases of consciousness and, 236–37
praise/criticism as, 696
by Purüravä, 636–37, 641–42
removing, 712
rope/snake analogy and, 642
Säìkhya philosophy dispels, 603–4
Satya-yuga and, 588
self-realization and, 538
of sense gratification, 537
suffering and, 150, 535, 578
value conceptions and, 16
See also Bodily concept of life
Impersonalism/Impersonalists
action and, 17
association with, 171, 184
categories of, 693
cause/effect and, 598
chanting Lord’s names and, 171
Deity and, 668
distinctions and, 694
disturbances from, 633
envy by, 176
Kåñëa objective of, 307
knowledge lack by, 19
liberation attempts and, 116
Lord’s qualities and, 242
material world and, 697, 699
Mäyävädés, 176, 237, 401, 407, 651, 722
mundane philosophers and, 506–7
satisfaction and, 650
spiritual world and, 697
variegation and, 413
Indra, 309, 315, 320, 574
Insult, 96
Intelligence
avadhüta brähmaëa and, 34, 35
controlling deity of, 521
devotional service as, 744
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
functions of, 207, 230, 231
mind and, 40, 230, 247, 322, 449
modes of nature and, 214
proper use of, 112
searching for Kåñëa and, 30
sense gratification and, 89
sense objects and, 122
soul’s transmigration and, 535–36
speech control by, 322
Intoxication, 139
Içitä-siddhi, 280
Éçitva-siddhi, 285–86
J
Jagannätha Deity, 668
Jaimini philosophy, 131–32
Jämbavän, 194
Janaloka, 593, 595
Janmäñöamé, 169–70, 182, 686
Jaöäyu, 194, 195
Jayadeva Gosvämé, 473
Jayanta, 602
Jéva Gosvämé, 152, 294, 622
Jïäna-miçrä bhakti, 203
Jïäna-yoga/Jïänés
detachment and, 440
devotional service and, 261, 492, 732, 738,
750, 751
fruitive work and, 718
goal of, 742
happiness of, 258
ignorance and, 754
impersonal liberation via, 743
Kåñëa and, 253, 402, 403, 404
mind control and, 275
paths of elevation and, 436–37
perfection of, 401
persons recommended for, 437, 438
pure devotion and, 419
scriptures recommend, 400
sinful activities and, 259, 454
solitude and, 99
speculative knowledge and, 400
vijïäna and, 412
K
Käliya, 196
Kali-yuga, 6, 12, 13, 183
Kämadhenu, 309
Käma-çästra, 267
Kämävasäyitä-siddhi, 280, 287
Kaàsa, 14, 648
Kaniñöha adhikärés, 685
Kapila, Lord, 310, 586, 587, 627
Karma-käëòa. See Fruitive activities
Karma-mémäàsakas, 252, 485–87
Karma-miçrä bhakti, 202
Karma-yoga
Absolute Truth and, 569
auspicious time for, 474
material attachment and, 440
paths of elevation and, 436–37
persons recommended for, 437, 438
purification via, 443
sinful activities and, 454–55
Käåtikeya, 312
Kätäyana-çrauta-sutra, 368
Kaöha Upaniñad, 153
Kaustubha gem, 675, 676
Khaöväìga, 557, 558
Kékaöa, 473
Kimpuruñas, 249
Kindevas, 249
Kinnaras, 249
Knowledge
barren, 165–66
basis of, 707
conclusion of, 166–67
cultivation of, means for, 707, 708
devotees give, 654
devotional service and, 117, 400, 409, 420,
458–60, 724, 750
divisions of, 6, 328
false ego and, 235–36
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
General Index
fruit of, 428
goodness and, 218–19, 507, 509
guru-disciple relationship and, 129
guru imparts, 129–30, 189
ignorance-based, 703
illusion and, 152, 633, 712
liberation and, 152, 157, 153–54, 401
living entity form of, 589
Lord imparts perfect, 25
Lord’s mercy and, 517, 518
material, 15
modes of nature and, 219, 621–22, 664
nescience destroyed by, 720
perfection from, 403
via pure devotional service, 188
real, 420
self-realization and, 211
via serving saints, 187
suffering and, 555
theoretical, 19
types of, two, 607
Kratu, 249
Kåñëa, Lord
attaining, 75, 326, 632
Badarikäçrama sages and, 14
as benefactor, 306
brähmaëas delivered by, 350
Caitanya as, 25
as cause of material world, 306, 395
conditioned souls’ perception of, 143
as controller, 306
controlling, 192–93, 194–95, 199
demigods request to, 3–4
descent of, 3–4, 5, 11, 173
devotees desires fulfilled by, 733
disappearance of, 12, 13
dust from devotees’ feet and, 257
as everything, 318
family attachment and, 355–56
fixing mind on, 222–23, 267
forgetfulness of, 146
as friend, 427
gopés and, 197–200, 256
guidance from, 734, 748
guru as, 338
hearing about, 182
incarnations of, 172–73
indebtedness to, 734
jïänés and, 402, 403
knowledge from, 760
love for, 180, 197–200
love for devotees by, 732
material manifestations of, 206–9
meditation on, 166
mercy of, 25, 26, 517, 518, 560, 733
non-devotional practices and, 197
as object of senses, 17, 18
as object of worship, 22
offering results of work to, 167, 168
omnipresence of, 737–38, 739–40, 741
opulences of, 319–20
material nature and, 317–18
perception of, 320
representations of, 307–17
respect for, 321
six, 428
as unlimited, 319
pastimes of, 13–14, 169–70, 205, 237, 407
philosophers and, 503–4
presence of, 12
Puruña-avatäras and, 172
realizing, 28, 30, 720, 721
reciprocation by, 180
regulative duties and, 388
rejecting, 733
remembering, 169, 170, 266, 739–40
return to Vaikuëöha by, 11
searching for, 30
seeing, 28, 30
self-conception and, 17
shelter of, 732, 733
as source of everything, 11
as Supersoul, 306
as supreme destination, 403
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
as Supreme Lord, 26
surrender to
fear and, 201–2
gopés example and, 201
knowledge/detachment via, 14
process of, 182
sinful activities and, 123
sub-religious principles and, 123–24
Vaiñëava dharma and, 120
varnäçrama and, 120
Vedic prescriptions and, 201–2
on Uddhava, 5–6
Uddhava-gétä spoken by, 2, 3
Uddhava’s love for, 752–53, 758
understanding, 2–3, 180, 402, 487
as unlimited, 26
as Vedas’ object, 495–98
worshipful manifestations of, 184–87
worshipping, 393, 405
yoga and, 22
Kåñëa-bhävanämåta, Çré, 294
Krsnadäsa Kaviräja Gosvämé, 294
Kåñëa-karëämåta, 297
Kåta-yuga, 314, 329–30, 587, 588
Kñatriyas, 333, 351, 352
Kubjä, 194, 195
Kumäras
astonishment of, 241
Brahmä and, 225
faith of, 240
Haàsa worshiped by, 242–43
questions by, 224, 226, 227–28
Uddhava’s inquiry on, 223
Kumuda, 676
Kumudekñaëa, 676
Kurara bird, 95
Kurukñetra, 635
Kurukñetra war, 410
Kuvera, 310
L
Laghimä-siddhi, 280, 283–84
Lakñmaëa, 195
Lakñmé, 5, 256
Liberated souls
activities and, 158, 160
bondage and, 144
duality and, 163
éçitva-siddhi and, 286
eternally, 706
imitating, 715
material desires and, 161
praise/criticism and, 163
qualities/faults and, 714
sound vibration and, 289
torment/worship of, 162
Uddhava’s questions on, 145
vision of, 157, 163
Våndävana residents as, 196
Liberation
via association of liberated sages, 44
detachment and, 462
devotee served by, 297
via devotional service, 107, 110, 141, 459,
460, 461, 751
dust from pure devotee and, 257
human body and, 447
impersonal, 154, 255, 395
Jaimini philosophy and, 131, 132
knowledge and, 152, 153–54, 157, 401
Lord gives, 105
Lord’s mercy and, 409
of Lord’s opulence, 395
lusty desires and, 371
mercy and, 664
pure devotee and, 461, 688
sense engagement and, 378
via surrender to Lord, 232
tree analogy and, 210
via Uddhava-gétä, 759
via yoga system, 273
Life air, 38, 713
Living alone, 99, 100, 103, 267
Living entities
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
General Index
conditioned/liberated states and, 150
constitutional position of, 145
cosmic annihilation and, 602–3
creation and, 107
as eternal, 531
independence of, 141, 151
Kåñëa source of, 318
respecting all, 738, 740, 741
as superior energy, 153, 154
See also Conditioned souls; Liberated
souls; Soul
Lust
from attachment, 481, 482
avadhüta brähmaëa and, 32, 33
destroying, 725, 726
as enemy, 646
gopés and, 639
influence of, 139
intoxication from, 268
liberation and, 371
saintly person and, 175
satisfaction of, 640
M
Madhyama adhikäré, 664–65
Mahäbala, 676
Mahä-bhägavata, 665
Mahäbhärata, 195, 374, 733, 751
Mahädeva, 195, 463
Mahäpuruñavidyä, 677
Maharloka, 341, 369, 593, 594, 595
Mahat-tattva
cosmic annihilation and, 602
creation and, 512, 590
defined, 510
false ego and, 522
Kåñëa’s opulences and, 308, 317, 318
modes of nature, 107
mystic perfections and, 282–83
potency of, 107
präkämya-siddhi and, 285
Mahä-vaikuëöhaloka, 14
Mahä-Viñëu, 593, 598
Mahimä-siddhi, 280, 282–83
Mälé, 195
Manu, 248, 309
Manu-saàhéta, 364, 366–67, 368
Maréci, 249
Märgaçérña, 313
Material existence
cause of, 703
devotional service and, 188
dream analogy and, 537–38, 703–4
emotions and, 705
experience of, 702
futility of, 390
as illusory, 151, 536, 698–99
Lord cause of, 413
Material world
annihilation of, 104, 600–603
cause/effect and, 597–98, 698–99
conception of, 17
as illusory, 15
impersonal philosophy and, 693, 697
ingredients of, 596–97
interdependent aspects of, 519–21
Jaimini philosophy and, 132
Kåñëa cause of, 395
Kåñëa’s opulences and, 317–18
as Lord’s manifestation, 207–9
Lord’s pastimes in, 735
as non-different from Lord, 283, 710–11
self-realized soul and, 21
speculative debates on, 522–23
spiritual world and, 699
stages of, 413
as temporary, 414, 415, 700–701, 723–24
transformation of, 518, 708
tree analogy and, 209–10
understanding, 27, 522–23
See also Creation; Mahat-tattva
Materialists
association with, 634
attachment by, 22, 23, 43
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
devotee misunderstood by, 389
devotional service misunderstood by, 439
goals of, 35
Lord’s form and, 699
pigeon example and, 52
without purificatory path, 467
religious ceremonies by, 668
religious principles for, 329
sacrifice and, 662
suffering by, 252–53
vision of, 29
Matsya Puräëa, 368
Maya
Avanti brähmaëa and, 555
cause/effect and, 589
creation and, 106
demigods and, 11, 25
dormancy of, 105
features of, 152, 153
ignorance/knowledge and, 152
impersonalism and, 19
influence of, 15
Lord controls, 11
potencies of, 142, 518
pride and, 731
sun analogy and, 49
understanding, 517, 518
See also Illusion
Maya (demon), 194, 195
Mäyävädés, 176, 237, 401, 407, 651, 722
Meat eating, 487–88
Meditation
body attained by, 109
gopés and, 199
intelligence and, 110
Kåñëa object of, 166
Lord worshipped by, 185, 186
mind control by, 569
mystic perfections and
aëimä, 282
aparäjaya, 296
éçitva, 285–86
kämävasäyitä, 287
laghimä, 283–84
mahimä, 282–83
präkämya, 285
präpti, 284
secondary, 287–94
supernatural body, 295
trikälajïatä, 295
procedure for, 269–73
result of, 274, 275
types of, eighteen, 279
Uddhava’s questions on, 269
Mental speculation, 248, 275, 522–23
Mind
controlling
by devotional service, 102, 448–49, 450,
452, 582
enmity/friendship and, 571
goodness mode and, 609
by guru’s instructions, 451, 452
by hearing Avanti brähmaëa’s song, 582
horse analogy and, 450
by intelligence, 322, 449
necessity of, 449, 569
by observing material nature, 450–51
prescribed duties and, 448
by sannyäsé, 392
sense control via, 570, 571
by worshipping Lord, 452
by yoga practice, 271, 452
as yoga’s essence, 582
controlling deity of, 521
cosmic annihilation and, 601, 602
creation of, 591
enemies of, 646
fixing, on Lord, 222–23, 233, 267, 419, 424,
formation of, 525
function of, 207
happiness/distress from, 565, 573
as illusory, 405
intelligence and, 247
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
General Index
as Kåñëa’s representation, 308
modes of nature and, 220, 221, 222, 230,
566, 567
objects of perception of, 525–26
phases of, 709
power of, 570, 571
ritualistic activities and, 569–70
sense control and, 645
sense objects and, 229–30, 645, 646
soul’s transmigration and, 108–9, 525–28
soul’s identity and, 713
stubbornness of, 566–67, 716
Supersoul and, 203
wind analogy and, 40
yoga practice and, 222–23
See also Meditation
Miser, 427, 429, 549
Mithilä, 757
Modern conveniences, 133
Modes of nature
Absolute Truth and, 709
activities and, 141, 158, 159
bodily identification and, 607
bondage and, 613
characteristics of, 509
competition among, 150
conditioned/liberated states and, 150
conquering, 214–15
cosmic annihilation and, 106, 601, 602
creation and, 106, 511, 522, 590
demigods and, 415
destination and, 619–20
devotional service and, 102, 439, 627–28,
629–30, 715
distress and, 95
faith and, 624
false ego and, 591, 592
food and, 624–25
fruitive activities and, 140, 489, 490, 663
happiness and, 95, 133, 625
I/mine mentality and, 610
as illusion, 633
influence of, 613–14
intelligence and, 214, 230–31
irreligion and, 216
as Kåñëa’s representation, 317, 318
knowledge and, 219, 621–22, 664
Lord and, 206, 208, 229, 615, 714
mahat-tattva and, 107
material desires and, 162, 220
mind and, 101, 222, 230, 566, 567
mystic perfections and, 279
neutral state of, 150
passion, 221, 608–9, 612, 615, 616–17
pervasiveness of, 626–27
phases of consciousness and, 235, 236,
618–19, 709–10
praise/criticism and, 694
pure devotee and, 463
qualities of, 608–9, 612
quality of association and, 216, 217, 218
residence and, 622–23
results from, 610–11
scriptures and, 217, 218
sense gratification and, 224, 611
senses and, 141
soul and, 232
soul’s transmigration and, 535, 705
speaking and, 607
spiritual world and, 519
strength and, 618
time factor and, 42–43
transformation of material nature and,
508, 509, 512, 518
tree analogy and, 209, 210
variegation and, 207, 519, 694
work and, 621
workers and, 623
worshipping Lord and, 612–13
See also Goodness, mode of; Ignorance,
mode of
Modesty, 427, 428, 609
Mohiné, 760
Moon-god, 310, 521
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
Moth, 67–68
Mountains, 37, 38
Mukunda-mälä-stotra, 348
Muëòaka Upaniñad, 308
Music, worldly, 74
Mystic perfections, 255
aëimä, 282
aparäjaya, 296
aspiration for, 726
attaining, 278, 297–98, 299–300
defined, 280
devotional service and, 298–99
éçitva, 285–86
five insignificant, 281–82
kämävasäyitä, 287
Kåñëa’s association and, 298
laghimä, 283–84
listed, 279
mahimä, 282–83
number of, 278, 279
präkämya, 285
präpti, 284
primary, 279, 280
as real opulence, 420
secondary, 279, 280–81, 287–94
of supernatural body, 295–96
trikälajïatä, 295
vaçitä, 286–87
wise persons and, 727
N
Nanda, 676
Nandaka, 676
Nanda Mahäräja, 180, 256, 732
Närada Muné
Deity worship and, 659
on fruitive activities, 484, 621
Gajendra and, 195
as Kåñëa’s representation, 309
Kubjä and, 195
Prahläda and, 195
spiritual body of, 109, 173
on transcendental processes, 189, 253
on Vedic literature, 166
Närada-païcarätra, 365, 350, 570
Nara-Närayäëa Åñi, 4, 14
Nara-Näräyaëa Deity, 6
Näräyaëa, Lord, 186, 187, 286, 289, 313, 593,
674, 676
Narottama däsa Öhäkura, 349
Nityänanda, Lord, 563
Niyama, 422–23
O
Oà, 205, 270, 288, 309, 330, 674
Occupational duties. See Varnäçrama
Ocean, 65–66
Offenses, 24, 441
Opulence, 427. See also Kåñëa, opulences of
P
Padma Puräëa, 340, 665
Päïcajanya, 675, 676
Païcarätras, 120, 662, 686
Päïcarätrika, 662, 663, 686
Päëòavas, 195
Paramahaàsa, 382–83, 389
Paramätmä. See Supersoul
Parikñit Mahäräja, 735
Pärvaté, 659
Passion, 221, 608–9, 612, 615, 616–17
Pätälaloka, 595
Pätaìjala çästra, 299
Paurnamäsa, 367, 368
Peacefulness, 178
Penance, 350, 365–66, 371, 570, 725
Perception, direct/indirect, 27, 28, 30
Philosophies, various
devotees and, 504, 505–6
elements and, 501–5, 510, 511, 513–16
examples of, 251–52
Lord’s energy and, 503–4
pure knowledge and, 506
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
General Index
reason for, 249
sources of, 250
Uddhava’s inquiry on, 246
Piety/Impiety
devotees and, 462, 463, 464
faithfulness to status and, 468
spiritual practices and, 454
Uddhava’s inquiry on, 434
Vedas and, 436
Pigeons, 49–58
Piìgalä, 78–79
anxiety by, 79–80
on conditioned souls, 89
Dattätreya and, 87
detachment by, 80–81, 87, 88
devotional service and, 82
illusion of, 82
lamentation of, 82–83, 85
Lord and, 85–86, 87, 88–89
lust of, 82, 83
on material body, 84
on men, 86
peace attained by, 91
on time, 90
Pious activities, 133, 261
Planetary systems, 593–94
Prabhäsa, 4, 758
Prabhodänanda Sarasvaté, 254–55
Pracaëda, 676
Pradhäna, 104, 150, 152, 206, 207, 602
Prahläda Mahäräja, 18, 194, 195, 310, 733
Praise, 96, 696, 693–95
Präkämya-siddhi, 280, 285
Praëava, 205
Präëäyäma, 185, 270, 337, 424, 426
Präpti-siddhi, 280, 284
Prasäda, 77, 78, 183, 624, 625
Preaching, 70, 172–73, 175
Pride
devotee and, 179, 182, 184
destroying, 725, 726
as enemy, 646
faultfinding and, 694
ignorance mode and, 621
surrender to Lord and, 731
Proprietorship, 124, 125
Pulaha, 249
Pulastya, 249
Puräëas, 195, 683
Pure devotee
association with, 188, 192, 193, 439, 443
body of, 383–84
criticism of, 468
defined, 660
Deity worship by, 669
desire of, 255
dust from feet of, 257
fire analogy and, 45
happiness by, 258
hearing from, 171
honoring, 183
imitating, 468
instructions from, 660
Kåñëa’s love for, 256
Kåñëa’s reciprocation with, 180
liberation and, 100, 461, 688
Lord protects, 14
Lord reveals Himself to, 25
as Lord’s representative, 172–73
material body and, 291
modes of nature and, 623
as non-different from Lord, 378
order of, 294
phases of consciousness and, 240
purification from, 182
qualities of, 175, 176–79, 257
sense gratification and, 258
senses and, 713–14
trikälajïatä-siddhi and, 295
vision of, 183
worshipping, 185, 186
Purificatory rituals, 218
Purüravä, 635–36
attachment by, 635–36, 637–38
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
disillusionment of, 647
illusion of, 636–37, 641–42
on lust, 640
on material body, 642, 643, 644
mendicant life by, 654–55
on mind, 645
on women, association with, 645, 646
Puruña-sükta, 185, 677, 681
Puruçävatäras, 44, 105, 172, 590
Pürvacitti, 316
Python, 64–65
Q
Quarrels, 99, 100
R
Rädhä-kuëòa, 492
Rädhäräëé, Çrématé, 92, 492
Raghunätha däsa Gosvämé, 92
Räjana, 677
Rakñasas, 618
Rämacandra, Lord, 186, 732
Räsa dance, 198, 199, 200, 293, 417
Rasas, 76, 196, 627, 664–65
Reality, 424, 425
Regulative principles, 77, 440
Religious principles, 218, 249, 262, 329
Renunciation
Caitanya and, 481
defined, 425, 426, 609
devotional service and, 396, 417, 439,
458–60
pseudo, 22, 39, 76, 92, 230, 415, 634
realization and, 413–14
religious prescriptions for, 480–81
sun analogy and, 48
See also Detachment; Sannyäsa/Sannyäsé
Residence, building, 104
Respect, 738, 740, 741
Åg Veda, 330, 331, 677
Righteousness, 609
Rohini mantras, 677
Åñabhadeva, 25
Åñyaçåìga Muni, 74
Rukmiëé, 13
Rüpa Gosvämé
on devotional service, 102, 176, 385, 459
on guru, 565
on Kåñëa, 175
on loving exchanges, 376–77
on penance, 350
on pure devotee, 383–84
on Rädhä-kuëòa, 491–92
on renunciation, 357
sannyäsa and, 374
S
Sacrifices, 136, 330–31, 353, 367–68, 426
Sacrificial fire, 670
Sahajiya, 715
Saintly person
fire analogy and, 44–45
honeybee analogy and, 68, 70
mountain analogy and, 37–38
ocean analogy and, 65–66
qualities of, 174–75
types of, two, 174–75, 194–95
water analogy and, 43–44
See also Devotees of Lord
Çälagräma-çélä, 668
Samädhi, 239, 312
Säma Veda, 330, 331, 673, 677
Saàskäras, 333–34, 663
Saàvit, 150
Sanaka-kumära. See Kumäras
Sanat-kumära, 313, 368
Sandhiné, 150
Sändépani Muni, 14
Saìkalpa kalpadruma, 294
Saìkarñaëa, Lord, 256, 601
Säìkhya philosophy, 240, 318, 502, 586, 587,
603–4
Säìkhya-yoga, 28, 241, 450–51
Sannyäsa/Sannyäsé
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
General Index
age for, 363–64
bewilderment of, 717
clothing of, 372–73
devotional service and, 560
duties of, 392–93
fall from, 374
householder and, 357
imitation, 391–92
as Kåñëa’s representation, 311
maintenance by, 374–76
material attachment and, 380–82
paramahaàsa stage of, 382–83
possessions of, 372–73
renunciation as, 424
self control by, 374
self-satisfaction by, 376
speech of, 373, 374
traveling by, 376, 380
vänaprastha and, 370, 371
violence and, 373
women and, 372
worldly music and, 74
Çaräìga, 676
Çatarüpa, 313
Satyabhämä, 14
Satyaloka, 593, 595
Satya-yuga, 314, 329–30, 587, 588
Scholars, 22
Scriptures, 69, 217, 218. See also specific
scriptures
Self. See Soul
Self-control, 424, 425
Self-realization, 31, 122
Self-realized soul
avadhüta brähmaëa as, 116
birth/death and, 533
bodily functions and, 718–19
body and, material, 239
destination of, 389
detachment by, 45, 48, 161, 633
direct/indirect perception by, 28
emotions and, material, 705
external awareness by, 238–39
fall down and, 90–91
fire analogy and, 45
as friend of conditioned souls, 86
fruitive activities and, 718
happiness/distress and, 579
honeybee analogy and, 68
knowledge cultivation and, 401
as liberated, 389
material world and, 21
perceiving, 110
physical/mental demands and, 27
qualities of, 21
renunciation by, 413
rivalry and, 574
senses and, 713
sinful activities and, 20
sky analogy and, 41–42
sun analogy and, 48
wind analogy and, 40–41
See also Pure devotee
Sense gratification
artificially checking, 82
attachment to, 23
austerity and, 424
availability of, 115
bondage via, 167, 537
brähmaëas and, 333, 347–48
cleanliness and, 425
devotee and, 178, 259, 455–56, 559
devotional service and, 122, 123, 248
failure and, 121
fear and, 142
forgetfulness of Lord and, 91
happiness from, 253, 410
hearing about Lord and, 441
human body and, 115, 116
intelligence and, 89, 122
Jaimini philosophy and, 131
lasting effect of, 111
madness for, 409, 410
mind and, 230, 419–20, 538
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
modes of nature and, 224, 610, 611
motivation for, 31
penance and, 369
pure devotee and, 258
python analogy and, 64
suffering and, 220
wealth and, 551
Sense objects
cosmic annihilation and, 602
creation of, 591, 592
enlightened soul and, 159
liberated souls and, 33
listed, 511
material desire and, 715
mind and, 229–30, 525–26, 527, 645, 646
soul and, 231
as temporary, 15, 121–22
Senses
attraction to, 113
bondage/liberation and, 378
controlling, 75–78, 178, 221, 645
controlling deities of, 521
cosmic annihilation and, 601, 602
creation of, 591, 592
demands of, 113
functions of, 206–9, 511
harassment from, 379
Kåñëa potency of, 317
as Kåñëa’s representation, 317, 318
listed, 510
as Lord’s manifestation, 206
mind and, 525, 570, 571
mystic perfections and, 279, 280
realizing Kåñëa with, 30
self-realized soul and, 713
sinful/pious activities and, 140–41
soul master of, 235
soul’s identity and, 713
tree analogy and, 209, 210
understanding Lord with, 186
Çeña-naga, 4
Sex
elephant analogy and, 71–72
by  householder, 393, 394
impious persons and, 139
moth analogy and, 67
with prostitutes, 84
satisfaction from, 636
spiritual advancement and, 103
spiritual orders and, 342
Siddhaloka, 299
Çikñä-gurus, 117
Çikñäñöaka, 348
Sinful activities
devotee and, 178, 260, 453–54, 463
enlightenment and, 342
happiness/distress and, 133
implications of, 138, 139
Kali-yuga and, 13
king and, 351
neglecting spiritual practice as, 454
occupational duties and, 442
self-realized soul and, 20
suffering from, 455
surrender to Lord and, 123
yoga practice and, 453
Sitting postures, 725
Çiva
Deity worship and, 659
false ego and, 521
as Kåñëa’s representation, 309, 311
Kåñëa’s return to Vaikuëöha and, 11
Uddhava and, 5, 256
Skanda Puräëa, 368
Sky, 41–43
Slave, 427
Soul
birth/death and, 533
body distinct from, 126–27, 128, 129
conception of, 17
elements and, 513, 514, 515
as eternal, 406
fire analogy and, 47, 126–27, 128, 531
as guru, 27
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
General Index
happiness/distress and, 572–78, 702
I/mine mentality and, 610
identity of, 713
intelligence and, 230, 231
Jaimini philosophy and, 132
as Kåñëa’s representation, 308
killer of, 447
Lord’s qualities and, 126
mind and, 229, 231
modes of nature and, 232
moon analogy and, 46–47
oneness of, with Lord, 507–8
perceiving, 19
qualities of, 508, 509
satisfaction of, 19
as self-enlightened, 126
sense objects and, 229, 231
size of, 308
sky analogy and, 41, 42–43, 48, 144
Supersoul compared with, 155–57, 721–22
Supersoul distinct from, 227
tree analogy and, 210
understanding, 128
Vedas’ teachings on, 491
See also Conditioned souls; Liberated
souls; Living entities
Sound vibration, 205, 492–94, 497–98
Speech, 321, 322, 373–74, 721, 722
Spiritual master
accepting, 124, 182, 211
arrow maker as, 101–2
body as, 110–11, 112–13
brahmacäré and, 338–40, 344, 392
child as, 96
deer as, 74
Deity forms and, 667
Deity worship and, 672, 676
disciple’s realization and, 390, 391
earth as, 36–37
elephant as, 71–72
faith in, 124, 338
fire as, 44–46, 47
fish as, 75
as friend, 428
honeybee as, 68–70, 72–73
honey thief as, 73
ignorance and, 641
indebtedness to Lord and, 734
initiation from, 218
Kåñëa as, 427
knowledge from, 129–30, 189, 390
kurara bird as, 95
life air as, 38
Lord’s energies and, 664
Lord’s mercy and, 664
as master, 340
materialistic, 582–83, 634
mind control and, 451, 452
misconception about, 665
modes of nature and, 581
moon as, 46–47
moth as, 67–68
mountain as, 37, 38
multiple, 117
as non-different from Lord, 391, 665
ocean as, 65–66
opportunity to obtain, 560
perfection of life and, 341
pigeon as, 49–58
pseudo, 716
python as, 64–65
qualification of, 565
remuneration to, 424, 425, 426
self as, 27
sky as, 41–43
snake as, 104
spider as, 108
sun as, 48
Supersoul as, 28
tree as, 37, 38
unmarried girl as, 97–100
vision toward, 338
wasp as, 108–9
water as, 43–44
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
wind as, 39–41
women as, 641
wood analogy and, 129
worshipping, 187, 211
See also Piìgalä
Spiritual world
devotee attains, 751, 752
devotee reveals, 170–71
energies of, 509, 520
impersonalists and, 697
Kåñëa master of, 172
material world and, 699
modes of nature and, 150, 620, 694
radiance from, 709
as reality, 710
variegation in, 519, 521, 711
Çrédhara Svämé, 242, 256, 261, 404, 452, 453,
622, 682
Çrémad-Bhägavatam
on Absolute Truth, 587–88
on detachment, 87
on devotee, 176, 559
on devotional service
death and, 438–39
happiness from, 408
neglecting, 553
satisfaction from, 7
sinful reactions and, 453
on faith, 438
on illusion, 535
on Kåñëa and gopés, 256
as Lord’s incarnation, 7
on Lord’s shelter of, 459
lust and, 268
on non-devotee, 176
on philosophers, 503
on proprietorship, 125
on pure devotee, 100, 688
on pure devotional service, 188
on Purüravä, 635, 641
on räsa dance, 200
on respect, 321
on sannyäsés, 717
on sense control, 75
on suffering, 188
Çukadeva and, 175
on transcendental practices, 189, 253
Uddhava-gétä and, 7
on unmanifest material nature, 602
on varnäçrama, 393
yoga practice and, 298
Çriväsa, 676
Çrivatsa, 675, 676
Steadfastness, 424, 425
Stealing, 72, 689–90
Sudarçana, 314, 675, 676
Çüdras, 334, 553, 749
Suffering
by Avanti brähmaëa, 560–63
cause of
demigods as, 574
enjoying mentality as, 268, 732
false ego as, 578–79
karma as, 576–77
mind as, 565, 572–73, 581, 587
planets as, 576
sense gratification as, 537
soul as, 637–38
time as, 577–78
control of, 133
defined, 427
destiny and, 63
detachment and, 88, 556
devotional service and, 89
dream analogy and, 703–4
duality and, 387
enjoying propensity and, 219–20, 221
experience of, 702
false ego and, 705–6
fruitive activities and, 132
illusion and, 150, 535
knowledge and, 555
liberated state and, 158
as Lord’s mercy, 556
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
General Index
Lord’s shelter and, 188, 408, 409
from material attachment, 716
material desires and, 91, 92, 221, 586, 639
from material enjoyment, 390
by materialists, 252–53
from miserliness, 549
passion mode and, 615
passion/ignorance modes and, 95
from sinful activities, 455
tree analogy and, 210
types of, three, 563
from wealth, 550–52
women and, association with, 268
Sugréva, 194, 195
Çukadeva Gosvämé, 175, 188, 438–39, 735
Çukräcärya, 314
Sumeru, Mount, 311
Sun, 48, 185, 186, 289, 310, 670
Sunanda, 676
Supersoul
aloofness by, 567, 568
as aspect of Absolute Truth, 587–88
contradictory features of, 698
cosmic annihilation and, 601, 602
Deity worship and, 674
direction from, 566
duality and, 722–23
elements and, 411, 513, 514, 515
fire analogy and, 46
fixing mind on, 419
form of, described, 272
as friend, 567, 568
guru and, 28, 664
ignorance about, 487
indebtedness to Lord and, 734
éçitva-siddhi and, 285, 286
Kåñëa as, 306
knowledge and, 405, 420
life air and, 203
material world and, 17, 520, 698, 699
omnipresence of, 386
Piìgalä and, 83
präkämya-siddhi and, 285
realization of, 412
seeing, 304
sky analogy and, 41
soul compared with, 155–57, 721–22
soul distinct from, 227
source of, 708
tree analogy and, 210
worshipping, 185, 186
Supreme Lord
as Absolute Truth, 588
aëimä-siddhi and, 282
aparäjaya-siddhi and, 296
as cause/effect of material world, 698–99
attaining, 688
benedictions bestowed by, 734
Brahmä instructed by, 247
as cause of everything, 598, 707, 711
as cause of material existence, 413
as controller, 105
cosmic transformations and, 708
creation and, 104–5, 106, 511–12, 587
devotee controls, 732
devotees maintained by, 744
dormant material energy and, 105
elements and, 503–4, 506
energies of, 153, 154, 588, 589, 664
as enjoyer of sacrifice, 424
fear of, 140
fire analogy and, 46
food remnants of, 77, 78, 183, 624, 625
forgetfulness of, 39, 50–51, 91
form of, 208
as friend, 733
guru non-different from, 391
happiness awarded by, 83
hearing about, 183, 441
human body and, 29, 114
impersonalists and, 507, 693
incarnations of, 296
Jaimini philosophy and, 132
knowing, 6
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
knowledge/ignorance and, 154
laghimä-siddhi and, 283–84
living entities separate from, 25
love for, 168, 443, 492, 689
mahimä-siddhi and, 282–83
material manifestations of, 228
material nature and, 518–19, 598, 710–11
meditation on, 109, 233, 272–73
mercy of, 90
appeals for, 410
attraction to bhakti and, 440
bodily identification and, 532–33
via devotion, 197
liberation and, 409
paths of elevation and, 436–37
suffering as, 556
modes of nature and, 613, 614, 714
mystic perfections and, 287–94, 299–300
name of, 493–94
See also Chanting Lord’s names
as object of service, 18
as object of worship, 83
omnipresence of, 29, 300
opulences of, 286
pastimes of, 188, 418, 661
penance and, 570
Piìgalä and, 85–86, 87, 88–90
pleasing, 87
präpti-siddhi and, 284
as reality, 707
realizing, 95
recognizing, 304
relationships with, 627
remembering, 478, 718
shelter of, 459
soul’s oneness with, 507–8
soul’s qualities and, 126
speech and, power of, 722
superior potency of, 150
as supreme authority, 140
as supreme eternal, 153
surrender to
devotee’s qualities and, 176, 178
false ego and, 24
liberation via, 232
Lord seen via, 265
pride and, 731
pure devotion via, 418
spiritual orders and, 345
spiritual world attained by, 728
by Uddhava, 26
as time, 283, 707
transcendental practices and, 189, 253, 300
trikälajïatä-siddhi and, 295
as ultimate goal, 307
understanding
bodily conception and, 242
via devotional service, 167
guru and, 117
with senses, 186
transcendental processes and, 253
universal form of, 331–32, 599–600, 685
Vedas and, sound vibration of, 492–93,
494–95
Vedic study and, 164
work for, 621
worshipping
in fire, 670, 680–82
fruitive workers and, 489
methods of, 661–62
modes of nature and, 612–13
occupational duties and, 442
penance and, 365–66
places for, 664
Purüravä and, 640
results of, 686
in sun, 670
twice-born status and, 662–63
in water, 670
yoga practice and, 452
See also Caitanya, Lord; Devotees of Lord;
Devotional service to Lord; Haàsa,
Lord; Kåñëa, Lord; specific forms of
Lord
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
General Index
Sutala, 14
Svadharma, 580
Svargaloka, 593, 594
Svarëa-gharma, 677
Sväyambhüva Manu, 313
Çvetaketu, 117
Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad, 156, 242, 308, 709
T
Tämbulé, 195
Täntrika, 661
Tapoloka, 593, 595
Temple, 182, 183, 184, 686, 687, 688
Time
cosmic annihilation and, 601
creation and, 522
fear of, 140
happiness/distress and, 577–78
illusory energy and, 286
influence of, 86
as Kåñëa’s representation, 307
Lord and, 283, 598, 707
material nature and, 598
modes of nature and, 42–43, 509
moon analogy and, 47
perception of, 529
pure/impure, 473–74
realization from, 90
sense gratification and, 89
soul’s transmigration and, 529–30
in spiritual world, 509
Tolerance
ability for, 540
chanting Lord’s names and, 740
conflict and, 545
defined, 424, 425, 609
by devotee, 38, 176, 177, 539, 563–64, 741
by earth, 36–37
previous activities and, 544
pride and, 563
by saintly person, 174, 175
by transcendentalist, 385–86
Trees, 37, 38
Tretä-yuga, 330–31
Truthfulness, 175, 424, 425, 609
Tulädhära, 194, 195
Tväsöra, 195
U
Uccaiùçravä, 311
Uddhava
Badarikäçrama sages and, 14
on delusion, his, 753
departure by, 758–59
doubt by, 202, 203, 204
family attachment by, 14–15, 755
Géta spoken to, 2
gopés and, 256–57
Kåñëa glorified by, 302
Kåñëa’s abode attained by, 759
Kåñëa’s disappearance and, 4, 13
Kåñëa’s final instructions to, 756–57
Kåñëa’s love for, 5, 256
on Kåñëa’s love for devotees, 732
as Kåñëa’s representation, 314
Kåñëa’s trust in, 6
lamentation by, 748
love for Kåñëa by, 172, 752–53, 758
pure devotion of, 14
questions/doubts by
on bondage, 144
on conditioned/liberated souls, 145
on Deity worship, 658–60
on devotional service, 171–72, 327, 407
on elements, 501
on enjoying propensity, 219–20
on good/bad qualities, 421–22, 433, 468
on independence, 144
on Kåñëa’s potencies, 304–5
on material existence, 701–2
on meditation on Kåñëa, 269
on mystic perfections, 278, 303
on piety/sin, 434
on saintly person, 171
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
on soul’s transmigration, 524
on soul-body/Lord-nature distinction,
516–17
on tolerance, 540
on transcendental processes, 246
on varnäçrama, 325
on yoga science, 223
on rejecting Kåñëa, 733
renunciation by, 6
separation feelings by, 758
surrender to Kåñëa by, 172, 189, 754
on surrender to Lord, 731
wisdom of, 27
on yoga practice, 730, 731
Uddhava-gétä, 3, 6, 7, 409, 759. See also
specific subject matter
Ujjvala-nélamaëi, 199, 294
Universal form, 331–32, 599–600, 685
Unmarried girl, 97–100
Upadeçämåta, Çré, 102, 374, 376–77, 383–85,
491–92, 564–65
Urvaçé, 635–38, 640, 641, 647
V
Vaikuëöha. See Spiritual world
Vaiçyas, 334
Vänaprastha
bodily care by, 365
death of, 370
destination of, 369
duties of, 392
maintenance by, 364, 366, 380
penance by, 365, 369
sacrifices by, 367–68
sannyäsa and, 370, 371
wife and, 363
worldly songs and, 74
Vaëika, 195
Varäha Puräëa, 195
Varëäçrama
Brahmä and, 393
brahmacäré and, 336–41, 344–45
brahminical guidance and, 346
Deity worship and, 659
devotional service and, 120, 179, 326, 349,
357, 394, 441, 750
duality and, 234
goal of, 329
householders and, 353–59
kñatriyas and, 351
Lord attained via, 395–96
maintenance guidelines and, 352–53, 355
mixed marriages and, 433, 434
modes of nature and, 611
natures of conditioned souls and, 332
practices for all in, 343
pure devotee and, 176
purificatory rituals and, 335–36
purpose of, 471
qualities and, 333–34, 335
remembering Lord and, 736
in Satya-yuga, 329–30
self-realization and, 103
sex life and, 342
surrender to Lord and, 120, 345
Tretä-yuga and, 331
twice-born activities and, 346
from universal form, 331–32
wife selection and, 345
worshipping Lord and, 393, 442
See also Brähmaëas; Sannyäsa/Sannyäsé;
Vänaprastha
Varuëa, 310, 521
Vasanta Païcamé, 686
Vaçiñöha, 312
Vaçitä-siddhi, 280, 286–87
Väsu, 195
Väsudeva, 314, 315
Väsuki, 311
Vätsäyana, 252, 267
Väyu, 521
Vedas
animal slaughter and, 487–88
cause/effect and, 597–98
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
General Index
divisions of, 491
essence of, 760
flowery words of, 77
hearing/chanting about Lord and, 651
Kåñëa author of, 760
Lord appears as, 203, 204
Lord manifests from, 205–6
on material world, 701
on mind, 571
oà as, 330
paths of elevation in, 436–37
prescriptions of, 16, 121
purpose of, 485–86, 495–98
ritualistic performances in, 382, 384
Satya-yuga and, 330
sound vibration of, 492–95
on speech, power of, 722
stages of, four, 492
Tretä-yuga and, 330–31
understanding, 19, 492, 495–96
Vedic knowledge
atheists/demons and, 250
Brahmä instructs, 248
creation and, 325–26
esoteric explanation of, 491
Kåñëa object of, 496
Lord imparts, to Brahmä, 247
piety/sin and, 436
purpose of, 250
Tretä-yuga and, 330
variety of desires and, 249, 250
Vedic literature, 166, 435, 471, 472, 662–63.
See also specific literatures
Vedic meters, 495
Vedic study
by brahmacäré, 341
by brähmaëas, 346
by householders, 353
modes of nature and, 218
remembrance of Lord and, 164
by twice-born, 336
worshipping Lord and, 452
Vibhéñaëa, 194, 195
Vicära-yoga, 274
Vijïäna, 412, 413
Viläpa-kusumäïjali, 92
Vinäyaka, 676–77
Violence, 95, 138, 481
Viçiñöädvaita philosophy, 152
Viñëu, Lord, 302, 309, 315
Viñëu Puräëa, 154
Viñvaksena, 676, 682
Viçvanätha Cakravarti Thäkura, 7–8, 11n.1,
Viçvävasu, 316
Vows, 452
Våndävana, 76, 180, 196, 290–91, 566, 623
Våñaparvä, 194, 195
Våträsura, 194, 195
Vyäsadeva, 25, 166, 485, 486, 659, 676
W
Wakefulness, 230, 235, 236–37, 527, 709–10
Water, 43–44, 218, 185, 186, 670
Wealth
anarthas from, 551
honeybee analogy and, 72–73
Piìgalä and, 80
proper use of, 170
religiousness as, 424, 426
shareholders of, 546, 554
spiritual knowledge as, 425
suffering from, 550–52
Welfare work, 37, 116, 174, 175, 177
Wife, 313
Wind, 39–41
Women
association with, 267–68, 342, 632, 639,
645, 646, 715
attachment to, 635–36, 637–38, 645, 646
control by, 637
devotional service and, 749
men attached to, 267, 268, 646
sannyäsés and, 372
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
as sense object, 376
as spiritual masters, 641
thinking of, 267–68
Y
Yadu dynasty, 3–4, 11, 12
Yadu Mahäräja, 7, 31–33, 34, 118
Yajïa, Lord, 331
Yajïadatta, 145
Yäjïavalkya, 162
Yajur Veda, 330, 331
Yakñas, 546
Yama, 422–23
Yamaräja, 14, 311, 653, 681
Yaçodä, 180, 256
Yoga/Yogés
attachment by, 22
bodily disturbances to, 724–25
devotional service and, 727–28, 750, 751
difficulty of, 730, 731
essence of, 582
fixing mind on Lord and, 100, 222–23
goal of, 299, 569
ignorance and, 754
Kåñëa and, 22
knowledge cultivation and, 400
mind controlled via, 452
planets attained via, 595
processes of, 23
sinful activity and, 453
unsuccessful, 716–17
worshipping Lord and, 452
youth and, 726
See also Meditation
Yoga-nidrä, 105
Yudhiñöhira Mahäräja, 410
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
General Index
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
General Index
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
uddhava-gétä
Licensed to Indiradymuna Swami for personal use
This book is available from www.touchstonemedia.com
