--- SOURCE: Upadesamrita-Subodhini-GDD/index.html ---
Upadesamrita-Subodhini-GDD
UPADEŚĀMṚTA SUBODHINĪ
GAURANGA DARSHAN DAS
Published and Printed by:
Tulsi Books (A division of Sri Tulsi Trust), 7. K. M. Munshi marg, Girgaum Chowpatty, Mumbai, India – 400007.
www.tulsibooks.com | tulsibookssales@gmail.com
Used with permission.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system or transmitted in any
form, or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise) without the prior written
permission of Sri Tulsi Trust.
UPADEŚĀMṚTA SUBODHINĪ
ISBN: 978-93-81283-75-2
First Edition – November 2020: 2,000 Copies
Dedicated to
His Divine Grace
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda
Founder-Ācārya of the
International Society for Krishna Consciousness
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
My humble obeisances and heartfelt gratitude to Śrīla Prabhupāda, Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākūra and Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākūra for their
insightful and lucid commentaries on Śrī Upadeśāmṛta written by Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī. Upadeśāmṛta Subodhiṇī is nothing but a concise representation of the
wonderful explanations of these illustrious ācāryas.
I am forever indebted to my guru His Holiness Radhanath Swami who taught me the
ideal mood of studying scriptures and encouraged me in my humble attempts to share
their message. I am deeply grateful to Gauranga Prabhu, by whose inspiration and
instruction, I am engaged in the service of scriptures and those who seek to
understand them.
I sincerely thank dear Maha Bhagavat Prabhu for painting the picture of Rūpa
Gosvāmī for the cover page. My heartfelt gratitude to Ananta Caitanya Prabhu for
proofreading and editing the manuscript. I thank the entire Tulsi Books team for
publishing the book.
— Gauranga Darshan Das
CONTENTS
Introduction
Upadeśāmṛta At A Glance
The Flow of Śrī Upadeśāmṛta
1. Six Urges to be Controlled
2. Six Vices to be Avoided
3. Six Virtues to be Imbibed
4. Six Loving Exchanges
5. Three Types of Devotees
6. Material Vision of a Devotee
7. Awakening Taste for Kṛṣṇa’s Name
8. Best Place to Perform Bhakti
9. Holiest of all Holy Places
10. Kṛṣṇa’s Dearest Devotee
11. Glories of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa
Author’s Profile
Short Forms and Sanskrit Terms
BG     Bhagavad-gītā
SB     Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
CC     Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta
CB     Śrī Caitanya-Bhāgavata
BRS     Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu
MU     Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad
HBV     Hari-bhakti-vilāsa
Karma Aspiration for mundane opulence (heaven) through fruitive
activities or Vedic rituals
Karmīs Followers of the path of karma
Jñāna    Cultivation of knowledge by philosophical speculation,
especially with the aim of impersonal liberation.
Jñānīs Followers of the path of jñāna
Yoga    Mystic practices for attaining siddhis or material perfections
(Aṣṭtānga) like becoming the smallest, greatest, etc.
Yogīs   Followers of the path of mystic yoga
Bhakti Loving devotional service unto Kṛṣṇa
Bhaktas The devotees of Lord Kṛṣṇa
Sādhaka Practitioners of bhakti-yoga
Prasāda Remnants of food offered to Kṛṣṇa
Dharma Religion or duty or occupation
INTRODUCTION
Once at Jagannātha Purī, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the most merciful incarnation of
Lord Kṛṣṇa in this age of Kali, took His intimate devotees to the shore of the ocean.
Seeing the blue ocean, He remembered Śyāmasundara, seeing the trees and sand
dunes there He remembered Vṛndāvana and Govardhana, and became overwhelmed
in the ecstasy of separation from Lord Kṛṣṇa. With great difficulty the devotees
brought Him to external consciousness. Then, Lord Caitanya began to softly instruct
the devotees, among whom was Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. Rūpa Gosvāmī recorded those
instructions in the form of eleven verses that became famous as Śrī Upadeśāmṛta.
Upadeśa means instruction. Amṛta means nectar. Śrī Upadeśāmṛta is a book of
nectarean instructions for all the practitioners of bhakti-yoga. For all sādhakas, this
Upadeśāmṛta is as dear as their very lives and like a necklace to be worn at all times.
Lord Caitanya has personally enlightened Rūpa Gosvāmī in the science of bhakti, and
has instructed him to write literatures for the spiritual upliftment of humanity.
Rūpa Gosvāmī understood the heart of Lord Caitanya and established His mission in
this world (śrī-caitanya-mano ’bhīṣṭaṁ sthāpitaṁ yena bhū-tale). Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kavirāja Gosvāmī, the author of Śrī Caitanya-caritamṛta, praises Lord Caitanya’s
mercy on Rūpa Gosvāmī: “The topics of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in Vṛndāvana have
been lost with the passage of time. Being anxious to revive them, Lord Caitanya has
infused the heart of Rūpa Gosvāmī with spiritual potency to enable him to manifest
them again, just as the Supreme Lord has enlightened Lord Brahmā in Vedic
knowledge before the creation of this universe.”
vṛndāvanīyāṁ rasa-keli-vārtāṁ
kālena luptāṁ nija-śaktim utkaḥ
sañcārya rūpe vyatanot punaḥ sa
prabhur vidhau prāg iva loka-sṛṣṭim
(CC Madhya-līlā 19.1)
Understanding of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes is best possible when we follow the footsteps of
the ācāryas, or the great teachers of bhakti-yoga. They mercifully give us various
prescriptions and prohibitions for our practice of spiritual life. By following these
instructions, we can gradually come to a stage of truly understanding Kṛṣṇa’s divine
pastimes.
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s Upadeśāmṛta is a set of eleven verses that constitute the
fundamental instructions to guide our activities in the practice (sādhana) of bhakti-
yoga. These instructions are a precious gift to genuine sādhakas, and are
indispensable.
Initially I didn’t feel the need for a study guide to Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, owing to its
small size. However, I received requests from devotees to make study guides for Śrī
Upadeśāmṛta, Śrī Īśopaniṣad and Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu in the similar style of my
previous works – Gītā Subodhinī, Bhāgavata Subodhinī and Caitanya Subodhinī –
especially to assist the students and teachers of the Bhakti-śāstrī courses in ISKCON.
This is the background behind my humble attempt to write Upadeśāmṛta Subodhinī.
In Upadeśāmṛta Subodhinī, I have presented the eleven verses of Śrī Upadeśāmṛta
with relevant titles and line-by-line translations to relate with the Sanskrit easily. I
have also concisely presented the key concepts and explanations from (i) The Nectar
of Instruction by Śrīla Prabhupāda, (ii) The Anuvṛtti commentary by Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākūra and (iii) The Pīyūṣa-varṣiṇī-vṛtti commentary by
Śrīla Bhakti-vinoda Ṭhākūra on the Upadeśāmṛta, in simplified sections, subsections,
flow charts and summary tables.
Upadeśāmṛta Subodhinī is an accompaniment for Śrī Upadeśāmṛta and not a
replacement. Upadeśāmṛta Subodhinī helps a new reader understand the flow and
essence of the Upadeśāmṛta, and serves as a quick primer for those who have already
studied it. For a complete experience and understanding of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s
Upadeśāmṛta, I request the readers to study The Nectar of Instruction by Śrīla
Prabhupāda and the full commentaries of the previous ācāryas. I seek forgiveness for
any unintended discrepancies in my presentation.
– Gauranga Darshan Das
Recitations of Śrī Upadeśāmṛta verses              (audio files) are available at
www.gaurangadarshan.com
UPADEŚĀMṚTA AT A GLANCE
Avoid things Unfavorable to Bhakti
1. Six urges – of mind, speech, anger, tongue, belly & genitals
2. Six vices – of over-eating, over-endeavoring, useless talk, improper
compliance with scriptural rules, bad association & greed
Adopt things Favorable to Bhakti
3. Six virtues – of enthusiasm, determination, patience, prescribed
practices, avoiding bad association & following the ācāryas
4. Six loving exchanges – of exchanging gifts, sharing hearts and
feeding one another
5. Three types of devotees – to be appropriately respected and treated
6. Not seeing pure devotees from material vision
7. Awakening dormant taste for Kṛṣṇa’s names
Reside in Vraja
8. Staying in Vraja, following devotees
9. Residing at the holiest spot of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa at Govardhana Hill
(9)
10. Śrīmati Rādhārānī & Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa are most dear to Kṛṣṇa
11. Bathing in Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa & taking shelter of Rādhārāṇī (11)
THE FLOW OF ŚRĪ UPADEŚĀMṚTA
Śrī Upadeśāmṛta gives the sādhakas two kinds of instruction: (i) to abandon things
that are unfavorable to bhakti, and (ii) to adopt things that are favorable to bhakti. By
faithfully following these instructions, they can easily develop bhava-bhakti and
gradually prema-bhakti, which is very rare. Without following these instructions,
entering the realm of pure bhakti and especially the path of spontaneous love
(rāgānuga-bhakti) is nearly impossible.
A sādhaka must avoid the activities unfavorable for bhakti. These include: (1) the
urges of the mind, speech, anger, tongue, belly and genitals, as well as (2) over-
eating, over-endeavoring, useless talks, improper compliance with scriptural rules,
bad association and greed.
Simultaneously, the sādhaka must adopt favorable things that nourish one’s bhakti.
These include: (3) enthusiasm, determination, patience, prescribed practices, avoiding
bad association and following the ācāryas. Upon progressing in these areas, one
must: (4) engage in the six loving exchanges with devotees (giving gifts, receiving
gifts, etc.), (5) appropriately respect and serve the three levels of Vaiṣṇavas namely
kaniṣṭha, madhyama and uttama, (6) never become offensive by seeing pure devotees
from a material point of view, and (7) awaken the dormant taste for Kṛṣṇa’s names by
regularly chanting.
Finally, the sādhaka must reside (8) in Vraja-dhāma, physically or mentally, and
follow in the footsteps of devotees who deeply love Kṛṣṇa. (9) In Vraja, one must
stay at the holiest spot of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa at the foot of Govardhana Hill. (10) Just as
Śrīmatī Rādhārānī is the dearest to Kṛṣṇa among all the gopīs and devotees, Her pond
is also the most dear to Him. (11) Therefore, sādhakas must bathe in Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa
and take shelter of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.
1. SIX URGES TO BE CONTROLLED
A sober person regulates the six overwhelming urges unfavorable for
the advancement in bhakti
vāco vegaṁ-         1. The urge of speech
manasaḥ           2. The demands of the mind
krodha-vegaṁ-        3. The impulse of anger
jihvā-vegam         4. The vehemence of the tongue
udara            5. The urge of the belly
upastha-vegam        6. The agitation of the genitals
etān vegān yo viṣaheta A sober (self-controlled) person who can
dhīraḥ           tolerate these six urges
sarvām apīmāṁ pṛthivīṁ is qualified to make disciples all over the
sa śiṣyāt         world.
When one is victimized by the above six impetuous demands, one falls into
the cycle of repeated birth and death, and is deprived of spiritual well-being.
Tapasya: Practicing to resist these demands is called tapasya, and one who
does so is called a tapasvī.
Direct bhakti: To hear, chant and remember Kṛṣṇa’s names, forms, qualities
and pastimes is direct bhakti.
Approaching direct bhakti: To attempt to restrain the above six urges is not
directly a limb of bhakti, rather, it is like a staircase to ascend to the platform
of eligibility through which one may enter the temple of bhakti. It is an aspect
of śaraṇāgati, which bestows qualification for bhakti (Vaiṣṇava-tantra,
quoted in Bhakti-sandarbha Anuccheda 236).
The Six Symptoms of Śaraṇāgati (Surrender to Kṛṣṇa)
ānukūlyasya 1. Accepting only things that are favorable for bhakti
saṅkalpaḥ
prātikūlyasya    2. Rejecting those things that are unfavorable to bhakti
varjanam      (described in Upadeśāmṛta Verse One)
rakṣiṣyatīti   3. Firm faith that Kṛṣṇa is the only protector
viśvāso-
goptṛtve     4. Absolutely no doubt that Kṛṣṇa is the only maintainer
varaṇaṁ
tathā
ātma-nikṣepa-    5. Feeling oneself incapable of doing anything
independently, without Kṛṣṇa’s desire.
kārpaṇye       6. Humility, or feeling oneself extremely fallen and
insignificant
ṣaḍ-vidhā      To possess these six attitudes is called śaraṇāgati or self-
śaraṇāgatiḥ     surrender
Upadeśāmṛta Verse One: The Six Urges
Atonement (Prāyaścitta) & Austerity (Tapasya)
Atonement That Doesn’t Stop Sin Is Useless
• Four levels of intelligence (with the example of how one restrains from stealing)
i. Learns by hearing from scriptures (stealing is bad)
ii. Learns by seeing others (being arrested)
iii. Learns after experiencing oneself (imprisonment)
iv. Doesn’t learn even after hearing, seeing and experiencing.
• Atonement without sense control is useless. A sinful act cannot be counteracted by
a pious act.
⚬ Elephant bathing: An elephant takes a bath and then throws dirt all over its
body (SB 6.1.9-10).
⚬ The Seventh Offence to the holy name is to commit sins thinking that one’s
chanting will counteract the sins (nāmno balād yasya hi pāpa-buddhiḥ).
⚬ Confessions: Certain Christians confess their sins every week in church for
relief from sinful reactions, but they commit those sins again.
Austerity Is The Real Atonement
• Real atonement is to come to real knowledge, or to awaken one’s dormant Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, by practicing a methodical life of austerity or tapasya.
• Traditional tapasya involves celibacy, cleanliness, truthfulness, mind control,
sense control, charity and yoga-āsanas. One can surpass these practices by the
following dos and don’ts.
• Prescriptions (dos): (i) Associating with devotees and (ii) Engaging in the Lord’s
service under the direction of the bona fide guru.
• Prohibitions (don’ts): Four regulative principles of no illicit sex, meat-eating,
intoxication & gambling.
Rūpa Gosvāmī’s definition of uttama-bhakti involves – (i) Cultivating
activities of body, mind and words that are favorable to please Lord Kṛṣṇa
(bhagavadanuśīlana), and (ii) Rejecting unfavorable things like pursuits of
jñāna, karma and other materially motivated things.
1. The Urge Of Speech
Examples of The Urge To Speak
• Jñānīs, speculators or nirviśeṣa-vādīs like to talk on things that oppose the
principles of bhakti.
• Karmīs and materialists’ talks unrelated to Kṛṣṇa’s service but to material
enjoyment.
• Prajalpa or useless talk: A frog’s croaking invites its own death by a snake.
• Mundane books that do not describe Lord Kṛṣṇa’s glories are pilgrimage places
for crows (SB 1.5.10).
• Mauna or self-imposed vows of silence where one expresses desires for enjoyment
by writing or simply by thinking in the mind.
• Words that create distress for others.
Controlling Speech
• Kṛṣṇa-kathā: To control speech by glorifying Kṛṣṇa’s name, form, qualities and
pastimes, and thus going beyond the clutches of death.
• The spiritual books or words that describe Kṛṣṇa’s name, fame, forms, pastimes,
etc., bring about a revolution in a misdirected civilization, even if they are
imperfectly composed. (SB 1.5.11)
• Kṛṣṇa-seva: Words about Kṛṣṇa’s service are the fruit of tolerating the urge to
speak.
2. The Urges Of The Mind (Attachment & Anger)
• Innumerable desires and plans are fabricated in the mind. Lust, anger, greed,
illusion, intoxication, envy etc., arise in the mind and attract it to sense objects.
• The mind’s agitations are of two categories
1. Avirodha-prīti – unrestricted attachment
2. Virodha-yukta-krodha – anger in frustration
Avirodha-prīti (Attachment)
• The mind’s attachment and restlessness are seen in
i. Jñānīs’ adherence to Māyāvādī philosophy
ii. Karmīs’ belief in fruitive results
iii. Materialists’ belief in plans based on material desires
• Negating all material thoughts and creating a vacuum in the mind is artificial.
• Mind control is possible only by thinking of Kṛṣṇa and His service. If Kṛṣṇa (sun)
is present in the mind, there is no possibility of the mind’s being agitated by the
influence of māyā (darkness).
• Meditating on Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes is not a form of mental agitation, rather it is the
means by which all mental agitation becomes pacified.
• Result: When the mind is controlled, i.e., when one is devoid of thirst for material
enjoyment, the urges of the eyes, ears and other senses become pacified.
Virodha-yukta-krodha (Anger)
• Anger is caused by frustration of material desires. When the jñānīs, karmīs and
materialists cannot fulfill their plans or desires, they become angry.
• In anger one uses harsh words.
• Controlling anger: Anger cannot be stopped, but it can be used in Kṛṣṇa’s service
by applying it against those who blaspheme the Lord and His devotees.
• Tolerance: One should tolerate all personal insults, but when Kṛṣṇa or His
devotees are blasphemed, one can become angry with the offenders.
i. Lord Caitanya became angry with Jagāi and Mādhāi.
ii. Hanumān set fire to Laṅkā to serve Rāma.
iii. Arjuna fought the Kurukṣetra war to serve Kṛṣṇa.
3. The Urges Of Body (Tongue, Belly & Genitals)
Bodily urges are three – demands of the tongue, belly and genitals, that are
physically situated in one line.
Lord Caitanya’s caution: One who runs here and there to gratify one’s tongue, belly
and genitals cannot attain Kṛṣṇa (CC 3.6.227: jihvāra lālase...).
First step: Bodily demands begin with the tongue, which is the most voracious and
uncontrollable of all the senses. If the tongue can be restrained by eating only
prasāda, the urges of the belly and the genitals can automatically be controlled
(śarīra avidyā jāla...).
Six kinds of taste (sweet, sour, bitter, pungent, salty and astringent) can agitate the
tongue and bring one under the control of its urges.
Eating the following types of food only for the gratification of the tongue must be
avoided –
• Dead bodies: Meat, fish, crabs, eggs and other things produced by semen and
blood.
• Intoxicants: Pan, hāṭaka, betel nuts, pān, tobacco, LSD, marijuana, hemp, opium,
liquor, coffee and tea.
• Spices: Use of extra spices like chili, tamarind, and even onion and garlic.
Prasāda: Only vegetables, grains, fruits, spinach, milk products and water offered to
Kṛṣṇa must be eaten.
• Even prasāda makes one fall prey to the demands of the tongue if one – (i) Eats
too much prasāda only for its taste, (ii) Offers tasty foods to the Deity with an
intention to eat nice food, (iii) Accepts invitations of a rich man with the idea of
receiving palatable food.
Lord Caitanya’s advice: “Do not dress luxuriously and do not eat delicious foods
•
(bhāla nā khāibe āra bhāla nā paribe).” (CC Antya 6.236)
Fasting: Eating more than necessary causes stomach diseases. Observing fasting
days like Ekādaśī, Janmāṣṭamī, etc., can restrain the demands of the belly.
Agitation and Control of the Genitals
Urges of the genitals or sex impulses can be legal or illicit (applicable to
householders and renunciants).
i. Legal: Marriage according to the śāstras, becoming a gṛhastha and using the
genitals for begetting good progeny.
ii. Illicit sex, not sanctioned by the scriptures, includes thinking, planning, talking
about, actually having intercourse, or by satisfying the genitals by artificial
means, by which one is caught in the clutches of māyā.
Controlling the sex impulse is possible when not used unnecessarily, but only to
beget a Kṛṣṇa conscious child. And the children must be trained in bhakti.
Renunciants should not listen or talk about worldly subjects, and should not think of
women (Example: Lord Caitanya’s strictness with Choṭa Haridāsa)
Conclusion
• These six urges present various types of obstacles in the immature stages of a
sādhaka’s spiritual life. One can dispel them by exclusive śaraṇāgati, by avoiding
the ten offences to hari-nāma, and doing ṣravaṇa and kīrtana in the association of
sādhus.
• Master of the senses (gosvāmī): One who can control the overwhelming passions
of speech, mind, anger, tongue, belly and genitals is a gosvāmī or master of the
senses, and can instruct the world.
• Servant of the senses (go-dāsa): How can Kṛṣṇa ever be manifest to a person
whose heart is invaded by lamentation, anger and other agitations? (Padma
Purāṇa). One who can’t control these six urges but is controlled by them is a go-
dāsa, servant of the senses, or adānta-go (SB 7.5.30).
• A servant of Kṛṣṇa follows in the footsteps of the Six Gosvāmīs of Vṛndāvana.
• In spite of hearing the astonishing glories of the holy name, one who maintains a
bodily conception and attachment to worldly objects is an offender to the holy
name. (Padma Purāṇa)
2. SIX VICES TO BE AVOIDED
A Sādhaka Avoids the Six Impediments to Bhakti
atyāhāraḥ     1. Eating too much or collecting more funds than
necessary
prayāsaś ca    2. Over-endeavoring for mundane things that are
difficult to obtain
prajalpo-     3. Unnecessary mundane talks
niyamāgrahaḥ     4a. Accepting scriptural rules only for immediate
(material) benefit
4b. Neglecting scriptural rules and working
whimsically
jana-saṅgaś ca 5. Association with materialistic persons not
interested in bhakti
laulyaṁ ca     6. Greed for mundane achievements
ṣaḍbhir bhaktir By being entangled in these six activities, one’s
vinaśyati    bhakti is spoiled
The Three Energies of the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa
1. Antaraṅga-śakti: Internal or spiritual potency (daivī-prakṛti) or Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī
or Lakṣmī.
2. Taṭasthā-śakti: Marginal potency that constitutes the jīvas or the living entities,
who are subordinate eternal servants of the Lord. They can be under the control of
internal or external potencies.
i. Mahātmās: Broad-minded jīvas under the protection or control of the internal
potency. They display their natural constitutional activity of constant engagement
in bhakti to satisfy Kṛṣṇa’s senses, knowing Him to be the Supreme Lord (BG
9.13).
ii. Durātmās: Cripple-minded jīvas, who are under the control of the external
potency (mahāmāyā) and are engaged in satisfying their senses
⚬ Personal sense gratification
⚬ Extended sense gratification to do good for others through nationalism,
humanitarianism or altruism.
3. Bahiraṅga-śakti: External or material potency (mahāmāyā) that subjects the jīvas
to three miseries –
i. ādhidaivika-kleśa: Sufferings caused by the demigods such as droughts,
earthquakes and storms
ii. ādhibhautika-kleśa: Sufferings caused by other living entities like insects or
enemies
iii.ādhyātmika-kleśa: Sufferings caused by one’s own body and mind (physical and
mental infirmities).
Main problems: Repetition of birth, old age, disease, death.
In the initial stages of bhakti practice, the material proclivities are prominent
in the sādhakas. So, they are unable to subdue the six urges described in the
first verse. Consequently, many other tendencies harmful to bhakti develop in
the hearts of the sādhakas. These are described in the second verse.
1. Atyāhāra: Eating/Collecting More Than Necessary
2. Prayāsa: Unnecessary Endeavor
Ati means “too much” or “excessively.” Āhāra means “to seize, grasp or consume for
one’s own enjoyment.”
Atyāhāra means excessive enjoyment of the sense objects through any one of the
senses and the endeavor to accumulate in excess of one’s requirements. Devotees
shouldn’t accumulate worldly goods like materialists.
• Renunciants are forbidden to accumulate material goods
• Gṛhastha Vaiṣṇavas can acquire goods sufficient for their maintenance, but not
beyond their basic needs.
• Animals do not eat or collect more than they need, so they do not have scarcity or
economic problems. Example: Seeing a bag of rice, birds take a few grains, but a
human being takes the whole bag.
Examples Of Atyāhārīs
• Bhukti-kāmīs interested in material happiness or karmīs who write books on
economic development.
• Mukti-kāmīs desiring impersonal liberation or the jñānī philosophers or
speculators who over-endeavor to acquire knowledge or write books on dry
philosophy devoid of bhakti.
• Siddhi-kāmīs desiring mystic yoga perfections.
• Materialists who gather scientific knowledge or money.
Atyāhāra Causes Prayāsa
The cultivation of knowledge by jñānīs, the austerities and vows undertaken by
karmīs, and the hard labor of ambitious materialists are all examples of prayāsa.
Economic Problems And Solutions
• Land and cows: Anyone can live peacefully with – (i) Some land for producing
grains, (ii) A cow that gives milk. There is no need to move from one place to
another to earn a livelihood.
• Capitalists accumulate wealth more than needed, and the communists, envious of
their prosperity, want to nationalize all wealth. Thus, economic problems continue
when people desire their own sense gratification.
⚬ Example: Seeing a $100 bill on the street,
▪ One may put it in one’s pocket (dishonest)
▪ One may not touch it, because it belongs to someone else (neglect)
▪ One may find the person who lost it and deliver it to them (honest and
wise)
Don’t Encroach Upon Other’s Rights
• All wealth belongs to Kṛṣṇa. By His complete arrangement, this world is
designed to fulfill the necessities of all the jīvas, who have a birthright to use His
property for their real needs.
• Thief: One who takes more than is required is a thief, and is liable to be punished
by the laws of nature.
• Ideal spiritual society: One who knows the art of scientifically utilizing God’s
property will no longer encroach upon another’s rights, quota or life (Īśopaniṣad 1:
īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvaṁ...)
Right Utility Of Human Life
• Human life is meant for simple living and high thinking. But some feel that plain
living with basic necessities is a primitive way of life.
• Higher intelligence is given to human beings for God realization – to understand
one’s relationship with God and to develop love for God, by following dharma or
scriptural injunctions, the laws of God.
• Prayāsa: But some men misuse their intelligence to possess unnecessary amenities
like slaughter-houses, brothels and liquor shops.
• Dharma is actually meant for ultimate liberation and not for material prosperity
(atyāhāra) or sense gratification (SB 1.2.9). Without religion, human society is no
better than animal society.
• True religion instructs people to be satisfied with the bare necessities of life while
cultivating Kṛṣṇa consciousness.
• Jīvasya tattva jijñāsā: The real purpose of life is to endeavor (prayāsa) to inquire
about the Absolute Truth. Without that we will simply endeavor (prayāsa) to
satisfy artificial needs.
• Materialists who have neither faith in God’s plan nor His laws, nor any higher
spiritual aspiration, misuse their God-given intelligence to augment their material
possessions. Always anxious to fulfill their unlimited desires for sense
gratification, they exploit their fellow living beings.
• Karmīs labor hard to accumulate more and more money for future generations,
because they do not know their position in the next life.
⚬ Example: A wealthy karmī took his next birth in a cobbler’s house, and was
beaten up by his former sons and grandsons when he went to the building he
had constructed in his past life.
• Unless the karmīs and jñānīs become interested in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they will
simply continue to waste their life in fruitless activities.
3. Prajalpa: Unnecessary Talking
Prajalpa means to waste one’s time and energy in useless, mundane talks, and in
criticizing or gossiping about others. It is like the sound of croaking toads.
Examples Of Prajalpa
• Jñānīs’ dry scholarship that amounts to nothing more than useless scriptural
argumentation.
• Karmīs’ praise of the benefits of pious deeds, which generates fondness for
religious rituals.
• Vikarmīs’ (materialists’) talks that are pleasing to the senses of those who are
have material desires.
• Newspapers, magazines, novels, crossword puzzles, playing cards, fishing,
television, debates on useless socio-political schemes and other frivolous acts.
If we must talk, we should talk about Kṛṣṇa.
4. Niyamāgraha: Accepting Or Rejecting Rules
Niyama means “rules.” Āgraha means “eagerness to accept,” and agraha means
“failure to accept.” Thus, niyamāgraha has two forms niyama-āgraha and niyama-
agraha.
Niyama-āgraha means –
i. To accept scriptural rules for immediate (material) benefits such as attaining
heaven.
ii. To remain over-zealous to adhere to the lower rules, even after attaining a higher
qualification.
iii. To accept the rules of the jñāna-śāstras to obtain liberation.
iv. To be attached scriptural rules of pragmatism with a desire for sensual enjoyment
in this life or the next.
Niyama-agraha means –
i. To neglect the śāstric rules and regulations meant for the development of bhakti
(even raga-bhakti)
ii. Failure to observe the rules that nourish bhakti, i.e., an absence of firm faith.
iii. Examples: Neglecting to wear tilaka, tulasī-mālā, chanting on japa-mālā, eating
only prasāda, etc.
Kṛṣṇa-prema is very rare and cannot be attained by neglecting the basic rules
of bhakti-sādhana. Mere imitation of prema without taking step-by-step
sādhana may give temporary happiness, but misery at the end. One has to
first give up offences and anarthas. (Kalyāṇa-kalpataru)
Bhakti without following the Śrutis, Smṛtis, Purāṇas and Nārada-pañcarātra
leads to a disturbance (HBV).
5. Jana-saṅga: Bad Association
Jana-saṅga refers to avoiding the association of devotees and associating with –
•   Persons not interested in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.
•   Māyāvādīs, who simply blaspheme Vaiṣṇavas.
•   Bhukti-kāmīs, mukti-kāmīs and siddhi-kāmīs.
•   Atheists, worldly and sensualistic persons.
Good association: One should live in the association of Kṛṣṇa conscious devotees
(bhakta-sane vāsa) and engage in the service of the Lord.
• Association with those engaged in a similar line of business is conducive to
advancement in that business (e.g. A stock exchange and chamber of commerce).
6. Laulya: Greed
Laulya means both unsteadiness and greed.
1. Unsteadiness is the fickleness of the mind to accept different kinds of false
doctrines or conclusions.
2. Greed refers to attachment for useless material sense enjoyment or worthless
opinions. Examples –
⚬ Desires for perfecting mystic yoga
⚬ Merging into the existence of Brahman
⚬ Attaining whimsical material prosperity
By prajalpa one indulges in criticizing sādhus, and by laulya one awakens a
taste for false conclusions. Both of these lead to nāmāparādha. So, one
should very carefully avoid them.
Conclusion
If one fails to give up these six unfavorable things to bhakti, then (i) one’s ability to
understand the greatness of kṛṣṇa-bhakti will be lost and, (ii) one will be forever
deviated from the path of bhakti.
By avoiding these six elementary faults –
• All enmity will cease between men and animals, capitalists and communists, and
so forth
• All economic or political problems of maladjustment and instability will be solved.
One can cultivate such pure consciousness by proper spiritual education and practice.
3. SIX VIRTUES TO BE IMBIBED
Six Activities Favorable For Bhakti
utsāhān-     1. Enthusiasm or eagerness
niścayād-     2. Confidence or firm faith
dhairyāt     3. Patience or fortitude
tat-tat-karma- 4. Principles favorable to bhakti
pravartanāt    [śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ smaraṇam]
saṅga-tyāgāt    5. Abandoning bad association
sato vṛtteḥ   6. Following the previous ācāryas
ṣaḍbhir bhaktiḥ These six activities assure advancement and success
prasidhyati    in bhakti without hindrance.
The Science And Glory Of Bhakti
Bhakti is not – (i) Sentimental speculation, (ii) Imaginative ecstasy, or (iii) Idle
meditation.
Bhakti is – Practical action (cultivation). Uttama-bhakti or unalloyed devotional
service unto Lord Kṛṣṇa is that which is favorable, unmotivated and is devoid of
fruitive karma, impersonal jñāna and all selfish desires (BRS 1.1.11).
anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam
ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu- śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā
Bhakti – (i) Stops all nonsensical mundane activities, (ii) Engages one in meaningful
devotional activities.
The Nine Processes of Bhakti (SB 7.5.23)
1       śravaṇaṁ-      Hearing the name and glories of Kṛṣṇa
2    kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ   Chanting Kṛṣṇa’s glories
3       smaraṇaṁ-      Remembering Kṛṣṇa
4     pāda-sevanam     Serving Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet
5      arcanaṁ-      Worshiping Kṛṣṇa’s Deity
6     vandanaṁ-      Offering obeisances to Kṛṣṇa
7       dāsyam       Acting as Kṛṣṇa’s servant
8      sakhyam       Making friends with Kṛṣṇa
9   ātma-nivedanam   Fully surrendering to Kṛṣṇa
Guidance Of A Guru
• The first step in bhakti is to approach a bona fide guru and acquire transcendental
knowledge from him through aural reception (śravaṇa), by submissive inquiries
and service, tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet. (MU 1.2.12, BG 4.34)
• Confinement: The jīvas are by nature pleasure-seeking (ānandamaya). The
material world is a place of confinement for them. Not knowing the process of
liberation, they wander in the universe in different species and planets
(transmigration).
• Liberation: A fortunate soul may receive the seed of the bhakti creeper by the
grace of guru and Kṛṣṇa and attain liberation (guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-
latā-bīja, CC 2.19.151).
• To attain perfection in bhakti-yoga, one has to perform devotional activities
favorably under the direction of the guru in all phases of life.
1. Utsāha: Enthusiasm or Eagerness
Utsāha or enthusiasm in bhakti means –
•   Endeavor executed with intelligence in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.
•   An action for Kṛṣṇa (kṛṣṇārthe akhila-ceṣṭā, CC Madhya 22.126).
•   Following the limbs of bhakti with great respect.
•   To resolutely execute the limbs of sādhana-bhakti while remaining indifferent to
the cultivation of jñāna, karma, material enjoyment, etc.
Success in any field – spiritual or material – requires enthusiasm. One should accept
the opportunity to go back to Godhead and carry out the rules that enhance bhakti
very enthusiastically. Without this enthusiasm, one’s bhakti will vanish.
Kṛṣṇa is all-pervading. Everything depends on His energy (mat-sthāni sarva-
bhūtāni, BG 9.4). A devotee understands that everything should be dovetailed or
utilized in Kṛṣṇa’s service (nirbandhaḥ kṛṣṇa-sambandhe yuktaṁ vairāgyam ucyate).
• Example: A dictaphone is a product of Kṛṣṇa’s energy and the brain of its inventor
is supplied by Kṛṣṇa. It should be used in Kṛṣṇa’s service, e.g. to write Kṛṣṇa
conscious literature.
2. Niścaya: Confidence or Faith
Niścaya means to have firm faith and confidence –
• in the statements of scriptures and the guru, whose words are fully in line with
scriptures.
• that bhagavad-bhakti alone is the ultimate objective of all living beings.
• that activities other than bhakti such as jñāna, karma or yoga do not yield any
enduring benefit, but make one restless.
Surrender involves confidence in Kṛṣṇa’s protection. A devotee thinks, “Kṛṣṇa will
surely protect me (avaśya rakṣibe kṛṣṇa) and help for the successful execution of
bhakti.”
3. Dhairya: Patience or Fortitude
Dhairya means –
• Fortitude in the practice of bhakti even in the midst of obstacles.
• Patience during the practice stage of bhakti, even when there is delay in attaining
one’s desired goal.
• Firm conviction that the path of bhakti is the sole constitutional path for all jīvas.
• Determination to remain on the path of bhakti, without slackening one’s
execution.
Steadfastness of a devotee: While the jñānīs falsely considering themselves
liberated, the premi-bhaktas who are fully protected by Kṛṣṇa, can fearlessly cross
over all obstacles, by placing their feet upon the heads of the predominating deities
who are empowered to instigate the most severe types of impediments. (SB 10.2.32-
33)
• Haridāsa Ṭhākura said, “Regardless if my body is cut to pieces and the life-air exits
my body, I will never abandon the chanting of harināma.” (CB 1.16.94).
One should not be impatient in bhakti but execute the guru’s instructions with
patience, depending on the mercy of the guru and Kṛṣṇa for results.
• Example 1: A newly married girl cannot expect offspring immediately after
marriage.
• Example 2: The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement was started single-handedly, with
no initial response, but because it was continued with patience, people gradually
started participating eagerly.
4. Tat-tat-karma-pravartana: Executing Principles
Tat-tat-karma-pravartana means to enthusiastically, faithfully and strictly follow
all the principles that nourish bhakti (bhakti-poṣaka-karma).
Neglect or laxity in following them will check one’s progress in bhakti.
• Prescriptions (vidhi): Hearing (śravaṇa) about Kṛṣṇa and chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa.
• Prohibitions (niṣedha): No illicit sex, no meat-eating, no gambling, no
intoxication, and giving up material sense enjoyment for Kṛṣṇa’s pleasure.
5. Saṅga-tyāga: Avoiding Materialistic Association
Undesirable association includes the company of karmīs, jñānīs, yogīs, nondevotees,
atheists, the opposite gender, womanizers and pseudo-religionists (asat-saṅga-tyāga,
ei vaiṣṇava-ācāra, CC 2.22.87).
• Even if one has all good qualities, if one is devoid of bhakti, those very qualities
transform into faults.
• So, keeping such bad association at a safe distance, one should live with and adopt
the ways of pure devotees and execute the principles laid down by the ācāryas, the
Six Gosvāmīs (bhakta-sane vāsa).
6. Sato-vṛtti: Following The Previous Ācāryas
Sato-vṛtti means to adopt the good behavior and virtuous conduct of pure devotees,
in whom all good qualities reside.
• Renunciant devotees can beg little alms from many households (mādhukarī) like a
bee taking nectar from many different flowers.
• Householder devotees should sustain their lives in ways favorable to Vedic
varṇāśrama regulations.
The ācāryas have expertly filled every moment of time with Kṛṣṇa conscious
activities (bhakti) without contamination by the three material modes. This is called
viśuddha-sattva (pure goodness free from the tinges of passion and ignorance).
• Examples: Rise early in the morning, attend maṅgala-ārati, read Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, perform kīrtana, etc.
The Glories Of Bhakti-yoga
• Ultimate path: Engagement in bhakti is the life and soul of the living entity. It is
the desired goal and supreme perfection of human life.
• No fall down: Devotees of Kṛṣṇa will never fall down (na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati).
• No loss in bhakti:
⚬ Even a little advancement in bhakti can protect one from the greatest danger.
(BG 2.40)
⚬ If one gives up material engagements to do bhakti only out of sentiment, and
falls down after some time, there is no loss. But what is the gain of executing
varṇāśrama duties if there is no bhakti? (SB 1.5.17)
•   Success guaranteed: Bhakti is so pure and perfect that once one has begun it, one
is forcibly dragged to ultimate success.
•   Resume again: Although a fallen devotee may be born again in a low family, his
bhakti will resume from where it left off.
•   Causeless and ceaseless: Bhakti is not the effect of any mundane cause (ahaitukī),
nor can it be terminated or permanently curtailed by any material interruption
(apratihatā).
•   All good qualities automatically develop in the character of a devotee (SB
5.18.12).
•   No material contamination: A devotee is not interested in any material activity.
Jñānīs, yogīs, karmīs, philanthropist, nationalists, etc. cannot be called mahātmās,
they are durātmās (BG 9.13).
4. SIX LOVING EXCHANGES
Six Loving Dealings Among Devotees
dadāti     1. Offering gifts
pratigṛhṇāti   2. Accepting gifts
guhyam ākhyāti 3. Revealing the mind in confidence
pṛcchati    4. Inquiring confidentially
bhuṅkte     5. Eating or accepting prasāda
bhojayate caiva 6. Feeding or offering prasāda
ṣaḍ-vidhaṁ    These are the six symptoms of love (prīti) shared
prīti-lakṣaṇam among devotees in good association.
Abandoning bad association that is unfavourable to bhakti, one should
associate with pure devotees, who can free one from the tendency to fall into
bad association. A description of the loving exchanges between devotees, that
nourish one’s bhakti, is given in this fourth verse.
The Three Pairs Of Exchanges
1. Dadāti pratigṛhṇāti: Lovingly giving what other devotees require, and lovingly
accepting those items that they mercifully give.
Distributing Kṛṣṇa’s holy name is a sublime example of the dadāti principle. One’s
willingness to receive this transcendental gift is the pratigṛhṇāti principle.
The dadāti principle set by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī:
• 50% of income for the service of Kṛṣṇa and devotees
• 25% of income for relatives
• 25% of income for personal emergencies
2. Guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati: Revealing to devotees one’s confidential realizations
in bhakti, and inquiring and hearing their confidential realizations.
An experienced devotee explains and an inexperienced devotee listens. One should
inquire about Kṛṣṇa consciousness and open one’s mind to understand the situation of
this world.
3. Bhuṅkte bhojayate caiva: Lovingly serving devotees prasāda and accepting
prasāda from them.
Prasāda distributed by a devotee to maintain the spirit of bhakti must be accepted as
the Lord’s grace received through the pure devotees. We should also invite devotees,
offer them prasāda and please them.
These six loving dealings constitute sādhu-saṅga in its pure form. Exchanging love
with devotees who are of the same spiritual aspiration as ourselves and who are
affectionate enhances bhakti.
• These exchanges are necessary even in ordinary social activities. Example: A
businessman arranges a feast for his business friends, shares his plans, asks for
their advice, and exchanges presents.
Power of Association
One’s desires and ambitions develop according to the company one keeps (saṅgāt
sañjāyate kāmaḥ, BG 2.62). If an ordinary person associates with devotees through
the six loving exchanges, they will surely develop their dormant Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.
Negative Injunction Of This Verse
• Feeding a snake milk and bananas simply makes it more poisonous (kevalaṁ viṣa-
vardhanam).
• Therefore, one must avoid the six loving exchanges with atheists, Māyāvādīs,
jñānīs, karmīs and gross sense enjoyers who oppose theistic movements that
educate people in God consciousness.
• Intermingling with them by sharing gifts, revealing the mind, taking advice,
invitations, dining and so on, may cause one to become affectionately attached and
be influenced by their atheistic mentality, especially if one is not very advanced in
bhakti (CC 1.12.50, 3.6.279).
⚬ Advising or describing the glories of the holy name to faithless people is nāma-
aparādha.
• If one really wants to attain the goal of human life, one should associate with
Kṛṣṇa’s devotees, who teach how to develop love of Kṛṣṇa.
Revival Of One’s Innate Love For Kṛṣṇa
Kṛṣṇa consciousness is not artificially imposed on the heart. It is not to be gained
from another source. It is innate in us, it is eternally established in all the jīvas, and it
is developed to some extent in human life (nitya siddha kṛṣṇa-prema, CC 2.22.107).
Process of revival: When one –
•   Chants and hears about Kṛṣṇa (saṅkīrtana)
•   Associates with devotees
•   Observes the regulative principles
•   Follows the ācāryas
•   Carries out the guru’s orders obediently,
then one’s heart is purified of all contamination, the fire of conditional life is
extinguished, and love for Kṛṣṇa awakens (śravaṇādi-śuddha-citte karaye udaya,
ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ..., Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka 1)
Power of Saṅkīrtana: Not only is the chanter of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra
purified, but anyone, including lower animals, insects and trees, who hear this
transcendental vibration are also cleansed (Haridāsa Ṭhākura to Lord Caitanya).
• Example: When Lord Caitanya traveled through the Jhārikhaṇḍa forest, the tigers,
snakes, deer, etc., all gave up their animosity and began saṅkīrtana. We cannot
imitate Him, but we should follow in His footsteps.
The Supreme Dharma Of Humanity
• Religion is the special function of human society in which even aborigines in the
jungles have some system of religion. Animal society has no religious system.
When a religious system develops and turns into love of God, it is successful.
• The supreme dharma for all humanity is that by which people can attain loving
devotion unto Kṛṣṇa that is unmotivated, uninterrupted and completely satisfying
to the self. (SB 1.2.6 sa vai puṁsāṁ...)
If humanity actually wants peace, tranquility and friendly relations, all people must
follow the Kṛṣṇa conscious system of dharma, by which they can develop their
dormant love for Kṛṣṇa.
5. THREE TYPES OF DEVOTEES
A Madhyama Devotee’s Dealings With The Three Kinds of Devotees
kṛṣṇeti yasya giri taṁ    1. Mentally honor the kaniṣṭha
manasādriyeta          devotee who chants Kṛṣṇa’s holy
name.
dīkṣāsti cet praṇatibhiś ca 2. Offer obeisances to the madhyama
bhajantam īśam         devotee who is initiated (dīkṣā) and is
worshiping the Deity.
śuśrūṣayā bhajana-vijñam    3. Associate with, honor and faithfully
ananyam anya-nindādi-śūnya- serve an uttama (pure) devotee who
hṛdam īpsita-saṅga-labdhyā   is
(i) undeviated in bhakti &
(ii) whose heart is freed from the
propensity to criticize.
Role Of Faith In Gradations of Vaiṣṇavas
Śraddhā is the beginning of Kṛṣṇa consciousness and the basis of spiritual
advancement.
Śraddhā means firm faith or full confidence (viśvāsa kahe sudṛḍha niścaya) in
Kṛṣṇa’s devotional service, and that by kṛṣṇa-bhakti one will automatically perform
all subsidiary activities. (CC 2.22.62)
A faithful devotee accepts Kṛṣṇa’s words in totality without interpretation, like
Arjuna accepted Kṛṣṇa’s instructions (BG 10.14) especially the last instruction on
complete surrender (BG 18.66).
Gradation of Vaiṣnavas: Without taking shelter of hari-nāma, one cannot become
hari-jana, a member of Kṛṣṇa’s family. Lord Caitanya classified the gradations of
Vaiṣṇavas as uttama, madhyama and kaniṣṭha according to their faith (śraddhā-
anusārī) in hari-nāma (CC 2.22.64).
• Kaniṣṭha is one who has chanted hari-nāma just once.
• Madhyama is one who constantly chants hari-nāma.
• Uttama is one, at the mere sight of whom, others automatically begin chanting
hari-nāma.
Faith to love: When one faithfully serves Kṛṣṇa, beginning with the tongue
(sevonmukhe hi jihvādau), by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa and eating kṛṣṇa-prasāda, one
gradually realizes one’s spiritual identity as a servant of Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa reveals
Himself to such a devotee (svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ, BRS 1.2.234).
1. Kaniṣṭha-adhikārī: Neophyte Devotee
• On the lowest platform of bhakti.
• Has pliable faith, komala śraddhā (CC 2.22.69).
• Receives hari-nāma initiation from the guru.
• Takes full shelter of Kṛṣṇa’s name, understanding that Kṛṣṇa and His name are
nondifferent.
• Cannot understand that a madhyama devotee is in a superior position, and that such
a position must be aspired for.
• Sometimes falls down by considering oneself to be a guru.
• Such a person should be respected within the mind.
Qualities of a Kaniṣṭha (SB 11.2.47)
arcāyām eva haraye pūjāṁ yaḥ     Faithfully worships the Deity in the
śraddhayehate            temple
na tad-bhakteṣu cānyeṣu       Can’t behave properly with
devotees and others
sa bhaktaḥ prākṛtaḥ smṛtaḥ     Such a devotee is called prākṛta-
bhakta
One should not remain a kaniṣṭha-adhikārī, but should raise to the platform of a
madhyama-adhikārī.
2. Madhyama-adhikārī: Intermediate Devotee
• Received spiritual initiation from the guru.
• Fully engaged by the guru in Kṛṣṇa’s loving service.
• Sincerely endeavors to perform bhajana and is a candidate for further advancement
in bhakti.
• Not strong in śāstric knowledge but has firm faith (śraddhāvān) in chanting the
Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, performing undeterred bhakti (CC 2.22.67)
• Merciful to kaniṣṭha-bhaktas, understanding them to be ignorant of sambandha-
tattva.
• Endeavors to turn the living entities who are averse to Kṛṣṇa towards Him.
• Doesn’t see all jīvas with an equal vision like an uttama devotee (A madhyama
devotee who falsely imitates an uttama devotee will fall down.)
Dealings of a Madhyama (SB 11.2.46)
īśvare tad-adhīneṣu        1. Worships Kṛṣṇa with love
bāliśeṣu dviṣatsu ca       2. Befriends the devotees
prema-maitrī-kṛpopekṣā       3. Is merciful to the ignorant
yaḥ karoti sa madhyamaḥ       4. Avoids the envious
3. Uttama-adhikārī: Advanced Devotee
• Mahā-bhāgavata, a perfect Vaiṣṇava, a self-realized and pure devotee in unalloyed
Kṛṣṇa consciousness.
• Not interested in blaspheming others.
• Sees everything in relation to Kṛṣṇa.
• See all living entities with equal vision.
• Interested only in Kṛṣṇa’s service, always thinks of Kṛṣṇa, and tries to spread
Kṛṣṇa consciousness all over the world.
• His association is most desirable and should be accepted in six ways (mentioned in
Verse 4)
• Without being self-realized, no one should imitate an uttama’s behavior, for such
imitation leads to degradation.
• Serving an uttama-bhakta is the root cause of all spiritual perfections in bhakti.
• Uttama devotees can be recognized by their ability to convert many fallen souls to
Vaiṣṇavism.
• An uttama is qualified to be a guru and should be offered everything one has. A
brahmacārī in particular should beg alms and offer it to the guru.
Kaniṣṭha and madhyama Vaiṣṇavas may also accept disciples, but such
disciples cannot advance very well towards the ultimate goal of life under
their insufficient guidance.
Different Types Of Vaiṣṇavas
• Prākṛta-sahajiyās chant Hare Kṛṣṇa but are not purified. They are attached to
women, money and intoxication. They may be respected within the mind, but their
association should be avoided.
•   Innocent people who are simply carried away by bad association should be shown
favor if they are eager for enlightenment from pure devotees.
•   One who utters “Kṛṣṇa” even once, is interested to chant Kṛṣṇa’s names, and is
trying to advance in bhakti, must be accepted as a Vaiṣṇava and is to be offered
respects at least within the mind (CC 2.15.106, 111).
•   But sometimes practicing devotees gradually fall to material life if they fail to
chant Kṛṣṇa’s name.
•   Neophyte devotees, who are initiated by a guru and are carrying out the guru’s
orders, should be accepted as Vaiṣṇavas and offered respectful obeisances.
From kaniṣṭha to uttama: A neophyte Vaiṣṇava, who seriously serves Kṛṣṇa,
strictly follows the regulative principles, chants the prescribed number of rounds of
Hare Kṛṣṇa and avoids the ten offences, and always thinks of how to expand Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, can become an uttama-adhikārī.
By trying to serve Kṛṣṇa seriously and without duplicity, we can expect the mercy
of Lord Caitanya, who is patita-pāvana, the deliverer of the fallen.
Dīkṣā Or Spiritual Initiation From A Guru
• Vaiṣṇava-dīkṣā by a guru is the process by which a devotee attains transcendental
knowledge (divya-jñāna), destroys material desires and becomes attached to Kṛṣṇa.
(Bhakti-sandarbha 868)
• Surrender: At the time of dīkṣā, when one fully surrenders to Kṛṣṇa’s service,
Kṛṣṇa accepts such a devotee to be as good as Himself. (CC 3.4.192)
• Prerequisites: (i) Disinterest in material enjoyment and mundane inquiries, (ii)
Readiness to practice austerity, celibacy, mind and sense control (SB 6.1.13), (iii)
Inquisitiveness to understand the Absolute Truth (jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam) and a
desire for spiritual enlightenment from a guru (MU 1.2.12, SB 11.3.21)
• One shouldn’t accept a guru without following his instructions or to make a
fashionable show of spiritual life.
• Results: Gradually one becomes (i) disinterested in material enjoyment and (ii)
interested in spiritual life (Bhakti-sandarbha 283).
6. MATERIAL VISION OF A DEVOTEE
Overlook the Material Defects in a Devotee
dṛṣṭaiḥ     From an ordinary vision, a devotee might have some
svabhāva-     defects in their nature (like harshness, lethargy, etc.) or
janitair vapuṣaś body (like ugliness, disease, infirmity, old age, etc.)
ca doṣair
na prākṛtatvam But one shouldn’t see a pure devotee from such a
iha bhakta    materialistic point of view.
janasya paśyet
gaṅgāmbhasāṁ The Ganges River might sometimes contain bubbles,
na khalu     foam or mud (in monsoon).
budbuda-phena-
paṅkair
brahma-      But the Ganges water is always transcendental and is
dravatvam     never polluted.
apagacchati
nīra-dharmaiḥ
Pure Consciousness
• Consciousness: Material consciousness is that which aims for material enjoyment.
Kṛṣṇa consciousness is that which aims to serve Kṛṣṇa.
• The activity of the soul proper is śuddha-bhakti or avyabhicāriṇī bhakti – pure,
unalloyed loving service to Kṛṣṇa, transcendental to the three material modes,
karma, jñāna and all material motives, and is performed in a liberated condition by
a fully surrendered soul. (BG 14.26, BRS 1.1.11)
Perceiving A Pure Devotee
Offensive Perceptions or Offensive Dealings with Pure devotees
Bodily defects
Low birth
Material vision
Accidental mistakes
Envying their exalted position
Criticism
Advising or correcting
Disciplinary action
Body: One should overlook any bodily defects in pure devotees, who are beyond
material conditions. One should only see the guru’s main business, which is bhakti or
pure service to Kṛṣṇa.
• Vaiṣṇavas who have realized their eternal identities are uncontaminated by the
natural transformations of the physical body.
• Considering their bodily defects is a serious offence at their feet – the mad elephant
offence (hātī-mātā).
Actions: Even if a devotee sometimes seems to do abominable activities, he should
be considered a sādhu, for his actual identity is to be engaged in Kṛṣṇa’s service. (BG
9.30, api cet sudurācāro...)
Birth: Even if a pure devotee is not born in a brāhmaṇa or gosvāmī family, if he is
engaged in Kṛṣṇa’s service he should not be neglected.
• Whether a devotee comes from a family of ācāryas or from an ordinary family or
from another country, the devotee should be treated respectfully.
• The gosvāmī title is not hereditary or a birthright. It is the monopoly of pure
devotees who can control their senses (and are not controlled by their senses).
Jealousy: There is no room for jealousy in bhakti, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness, which is
meant for paramahaṁsas who are never envious (nirmatsara).
• The title of gosvāmī – whether attained by birth in a gosvāmīs’ family or awarded –
shouldn’t make one proud or jealous. As soon as one becomes proud or envious,
one falls down.
Material vision: Don’t see the activities of pure Vaiṣṇavas from a material point of
view. Especially for the neophyte, this is injurious. Try to understand how the pure
devotees are engaged in Kṛṣṇa’s service, and thus become purified oneself.
• One is superior or inferior according to one’s spiritual development. One should be
ready to take instructions from a superior Vaiṣṇava, who must be ready to help an
inferior Vaiṣṇava.
• Those who think that bhakti is limited to certain people, or a certain place are
generally prone to see the external features of the devotee.
• Such neophytes, unable to appreciate the exalted and confidential service of the
advanced devotee, try to bring the mahā-bhāgavata to their platform.
• Unless one is empowered by Kṛṣṇa, one cannot spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness all
over the world.
Criticism: Criticizing a pure devotee is a dangerous offence (vaiṣṇava-aparādha)
that is obstructive for advancement in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and one cannot derive
any spiritual benefit by that.
Advice and discipline: It’s an offence to give advice to, or to correct, an empowered
Vaiṣṇava (guru) or to consider him an object of disciplinary action.
Understanding A Devotee’s Glory
• Pure devotees are not mere conditioned souls. They do not fall into bad association
or commit offences to the holy name.
• Unless one is a devotee, one cannot see another devotee perfectly. A kaniṣṭha-
adhikārī cannot distinguish between a devotee and a nondevotee, but a madhyama-
adhikārī can.
• One can distinguish between a neophyte Vaiṣṇava and an advanced Vaiṣṇava by
their activities.
• The advanced Vaiṣṇava is always situated as guru, and the neophyte as disciple.
• The guru must not be subjected to the advice of a disciple, nor should a guru be
obliged to take instructions from those who are not his disciples.
Caution: If one who has made some progress in bhakti considers themselves a
devotee and begins engaging in material misconduct, they will certainly fall from the
path of bhakti. By coming into contact with such persons, one’s bhakti is destroyed.
7. AWAKENING TASTE FOR KṚṢṆA’S NAME
Lord Kṛṣṇa’s Names and Pastimes
syāt kṛṣṇa-nāma- Kṛṣṇa’s name, pastimes etc., are all absolute and
caritādi-sitāpy    sweet like sugar. But due to ignorance,
avidyā-
pittopatapta-     one cannot relish them, just as the tongue of one
rasanasya na rocikā afflicted by jaundice tastes sweet as bitter.
nu
kintv ādarād      Yet, by careful and daily treatment (eating sweets
anudinaṁ khalu or chanting Kṛṣṇa’s names),
saiva juṣṭā
svādvī kramād      a natural relish awakens in the tongue (to taste
bhavati tad-gada- kṛṣṇa-nāma), and the jaundice of ignorance is
mūla-hantrī       destroyed at the root.
Material Disease (Jaundice) & Its Remedy (Sugar)
• Healthy condition: A jīva is naturally an eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa (jīvera
‘svarūpa’ haya-kṛṣṇera ’nitya-dāsa, CC 2.20.108). Every jīva is like a minute
conscious particle within a ray of the complete conscious Kṛṣṇa-sun.
• Diseased condition: This arises when the jīva forgets Kṛṣṇa due to the jaundice of
timeless ignorance (avidyā) by which one gets attracted by māyā or the
materialistic way of life. Thus, the jīva loses taste for the chanting of Kṛṣṇa’s
names.
• The material world of māyā is called durāśraya or “false shelter.” One who puts
his faith in it is hoping against hope for happiness. People struggle for existence
and try to become happy, but their attempts are baffled. In ignorance, they try to
rectify one mistake by making another mistake. But they don’t take to Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.
• Blind leaders like politicians, philosophers and scientists, being atheistic, sinful,
ignorant, lowly and not surrendered to Kṛṣṇa (BG 7.15), mislead common people.
They oppose the endeavors of those who wish to take to Kṛṣṇa’s shelter, and
dampen their enthusiasm.
• Medicine: Just as sugar candy is the medicine for jaundice, Kṛṣṇa’s name is the
remedy to improve the spiritual health of humanity. But just as sugar initially tastes
bitter to a jaundice patient, the holy name is not immediately relishable to one who
is materially engrossed (Padma Purāṇa).
• Treatment: By regularly taking sugar candy, one’s jaundice is cured and sugar
becomes tasteful to him. Similarly, by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa in sādhu-sanga with
enthusiasm, faith and patience, one is freed from false ego (ahaṅkāra) born of
ignorance (avidyā), and one revives a natural taste for kṛṣṇa-kathā and one’s real
spiritual identity.
⚬ Wherever there is the sunshine of Kṛṣṇa, there cannot be the darkness (or
shadow) of māyā or forgetfulness of Kṛṣṇa (CC 2.22.31).
⚬ If one’s consciousness is cleansed (ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam), one is freed from
the blazing fire of material existence (bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpanam).
Stages Of Chanting
1. Nāmāparādha or the offensive stage in which a neophyte commits ten basic
offences.
2. Nāmābhāsa or the stage of lessening offences.
3. Śuddha-nāma or the pure stage at which one is liberated and relishes the taste of
spiritual life.
Stages Of Bhakti
1. Śraddhā: Bhakti begins with faith, which is increased by chanting Kṛṣṇa’s holy
name.
2. Sadhu-sanga: Saṅkīrtana attracts thousands of people, who sometimes imitate
devotees. Some imitators become interested in being initiated by the guru
(imitation of a good thing is desirable).
3. Bhajana-kriyā: After initiation, one serves Kṛṣṇa by daily chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa,
and refraining from illicit sex, intoxicants, meat-eating and gambling.
4. Anartha-nivṛtti: Thus, one attains freedom from the contamination of
materialistic life and is cleansed of unwanted things or anarthas.
5. Niṣṭha:: One becomes fixed in Kṛṣṇa activities.
6. Ruci: One develops taste for such activities.
7. Āsakti: One becomes fully attached to bhakti.
8. Bhāva: One experiences ecstasy in bhakti, which is the preliminary awakening of
love for Kṛṣṇa, at which the devotee –
⚬ loses interest in the bodily conception of life, material opulence, knowledge and
attractions
⚬ understands who the Supreme Lord is
⚬ is undisturbed by māyā.
9. Prema: Pure love for Kṛṣṇa.
8. BEST PLACE TO PERFORM BHAKTI
Stay in Vraja & Serve Kṛṣṇa Following the Devotees
tan-nāma-rūpa-     One should discuss about Kṛṣṇa’s name, form,
caritādi-      pastimes, character, etc., and
sukīrtanānu-
smṛtyoḥ krameṇa remember them by gradually engaging one’s
rasanā-manasī     tongue and mind.
niyojya
tiṣṭhan vraje tad- One should thus reside in Vraja and serve Kṛṣṇa,
anurāgi-       following the devotees who are attached to His
janānugāmī       bhakti.
kālaṁ nayed      One should utilize one’s full time in this way. This
akhilam ity     is the essence of all advice.
upadeśa-sāram
Service rendered within the mind (mānasa-sevā), is dependent solely upon
residing mentally in Vraja.
Training The Mind In Cultivating Bhakti
Impressions: The mind contains thousands of impressions from many lives, that
combine with each other and produce contradictory pictures.
Transmigration: At the time of death, one’s mind and intelligence create the subtle
form of a certain type of body for the next life. Whatever one remembers when one
quits the body, one will attain that state of being without fail (BG 8.6 yaṁ yaṁ
vāpi...). If one thinks of Kṛṣṇa, one can attain Goloka Vṛndāvana.
Training: The mind is one’s friend if it is trained in – (i) Giving up material motives,
(ii) Following regulative principles, and (iii) Chanting and remembering Kṛṣṇa. The
untrained mind is one’s enemy.
Residence: Developing taste in bhakti in this way, one should live in Vṛndāvana or
any part of the 84 krośas area of Vrajabhūmi, take shelter of an advanced devotee,
and think of Kṛṣṇa.
Guidance: One must place oneself under the guidance of a particular associate of
Kṛṣṇa, follow the footsteps of that devotee, with a feeling similar to that devotee, and
thus serve Kṛṣṇa. This is applicable both in the stages of sādhana (practice) and
sādhya (perfection) when one becomes a siddha-puruṣa (spiritually perfect soul).
(BRS 1.2.294-295)
From Śravaṇa To Smaraṇa
Śravaṇa-daśā → Varaṇa-daśā → Smaraṇa-daśā → Āpāna-daśā → Sampatti-
daśā
1. Śravaṇa-daśā: The neophyte stage in which one hears kṛṣṇa-nāma and kṛṣṇa-
kathā constantly.
2. Varaṇa-daśā: The stage of acceptance in which one becomes attached to hearing
kṛṣṇa-kathā and performs kīrtana of what one is hearing.
3. Smaraṇa-daśā: The stage of remembering Kṛṣṇa when one can chant in ecstasy. It
has 5 levels.
Smaraṇa → Dhāraṇa → Dhyāna → Anusmṛti → Samādhi
i. Smaraṇa: Recollection, or distracted remembrance of Kṛṣṇa.
ii. Dhāraṇa: Absorption, or remembrance of Kṛṣṇa without distractions.
iii.Dhyāna: Meditation, or concentrated remembrance, or unbroken
contemplation on Kṛṣṇa.
iv.Anusmṛti: Constant performance of dhyāna.
v. Samādhi: Unceasing anusmṛti or spiritual trance, where one’s meditation is
entirely free from impediments and wholly uninterrupted.
4. Āpāna-daśā: The stage where the sādhaka achieves realization of one’s pure
spiritual identity.
5. Sampatti-daśā: The stage of perfection when the soul finally obtains a spiritual
form and is appointed to the eternal service of Kṛṣṇa in the spiritual realm (vastu-
siddhi).
Bhakti: Vaidhi (Regulative) & Rāga (Spontaneous)
Vaidhi-bhakti: A neophyte should give up all kinds of motivated desires and engage
in the regulative principles of bhakti as per the scriptures, guru and Vaiṣṇavas. Thus,
one gradually develops taste (ruci) for Kṛṣṇa’s name, fame, form, qualities and so
forth. When one attains ruci, then one can enter the path of rāgānuga-bhakti.
Rāgātmikā-bhakti is that devotion for Kṛṣṇa whose very essence is constituted of
eternal spontaneous love and attachment (rāga), without following scriptural rules. It
is splendidly manifest in the Vraja-vāsīs. (CC 2.22.149-153)
Rāgānuga-bhakti is that devotion that follows in the wake of this rāgātmikā-bhakti,
following the footsteps of one of the eternal associates of Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana. The
sādhana of rāgānuga-bhakti is of two types (CC 2.22.156-157):
i. Bāhya: Externally one performs hearing and chanting in the sādhaka-rūpa, the
outer feature of a practitioner of bhakti.
ii. Antara: Internally, one serves Kṛṣṇa in one’s own perfected spiritual form
(siddha-rūpa) in Vraja, following the eternal Vraja-vāsīs (kṛṣṇa-preṣṭa) who
possess the same mood as which one aspires for.
The Five Rasas In Rāgānuga-bhakti
1. Śānta-rasa: Aspiring to be like Kṛṣṇa’s cows, stick, flute, buffalo horns, kadamba
trees, the flowers around His neck and so forth.
2. Dāsya-rasa: Following the footsteps of servants like Citraka, Patraka or Raktaka.
3. Sakhya-rasa: Following the footsteps of Kṛṣṇa’s friends like Baladeva, Śrīdāmā
or Sudāmā.
4. Vātsalya-rasa: Aspiring to serve Kṛṣṇa in the mellow of parenthood and thus
following Nanda Mahārāja and Mother Yaśodā.
5. Mādhurya-rasa: Following Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī or the gopīs (like Lalitā, Viśākhā)
or mañjarīs (like Rūpa, Rati) in serving Kṛṣṇa in conjugal love.
While residing in Vraja, one should become immersed in hearing narrations of the
eternal devotees who serve Kṛṣṇa in the mood for which one aspires.
Vraja is the best place to serve Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, even Brahmā and
Uddhava pray to take birth in Vraja as a blade of grass or a shrub.
9. HOLIEST OF ALL HOLY PLACES
The Topmost of All Holy Places
vaikuṇṭhāj janito varā 0. Vaikuṇṭha is superior to the material world.
madhu-purī tatrāpi 1. Mathurā is still superior, because Kṛṣṇa
rāsotsavād        appeared there.
2. Vṛndāvana is more superior, because of
vṛndāraṇyam udāra- Kṛṣṇa’s rāsa-līlā.
pāṇi-ramaṇāt tatrāpi 3. Govardhana Hill is still superior, for Kṛṣṇa
govardhanaḥ        raised it with His divine hand and performed His
pastimes there.
rādhā-kuṇḍam ihāpi 4. Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa stands above all, as it is
gokula-pateḥ       overflooded with the nectar of divine love of
premāmṛtāplāvanāt Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of Gokula.
kuryād asya virājato Then who is that intelligent person unwilling to
giri-taṭe sevāṁ vivekī serve Rādhā-kuṇḍa, which is at the foot of
na kaḥ          Govardhana Hill?
The Gradation Of Holy Places
Vaikuṇṭha, situated in the spiritual sky, occupying three fourths of the total creation,
is the most exalted abode and is superior to the material world.
Mathurā and the adjoining areas, although appearing in the material world, are
superior to Vaikuṇṭha because Kṛṣṇa Himself appeared at Mathurā.
Vṛndāvana is superior to Mathurā because of the presence of the twelve forests
(dvādaśa-vana), such as Tālavana, Madhuvana and Bahulāvana, which are famous
for the various pastimes of Kṛṣṇa including the rāsa-līlā.
Govardhana Hill is even more superior because Kṛṣṇa lifted it like an umbrella to
protect the Vrajavāsīs from the rains sent by Indra. At Govardhana, Kṛṣṇa tends the
cows with the gopas, and performs loving pastimes with His most beloved Śrī Rādhā.
Rādhā-kuṇḍa is superior to all because Kṛṣṇa’s love overflows there and Kṛṣṇa’s
eternal loving affairs with Rādhārāṇī (rati-vilāsa) took place there. So, advanced
devotees prefer to reside at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, the special storehouse of Kṛṣṇa’s nectarean
love (premāmṛta).
Lord Caitanya searched for Rādhā-kuṇḍa in His first visit to Vrajabhūmi, and finally
found it and took bath there. Later the pond was excavated by His devotees, headed
by the Six Gosvāmīs. Rādhā-kuṇḍa can be worshiped only by the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas.
Its spiritual importance cannot be realized by other Vaiṣṇava sampradāyas or non-
devotees.
Devotees endowed with true spiritual intelligence perform bhakti while residing at
Rādhā-kuṇḍa, either in their material bodies or in their spiritually perfected forms.
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, being fully conversant with the devotional sentiments
within Lord Caitanya’s heart, has described service to Rādhā-kuṇḍa as the
topmost. The glories of Rādhā-kuṇḍa are incomprehensible and inaccessible
even for the devotees who may have taken shelter of mādhurya-rasa, yet are
devoid of devotion to Lord Caitanya.
10. KṚṢṆA’S DEAREST DEVOTEE
The Glory of Śrī Rādhā & Rādhā-kuṇḍa
karmibhyaḥ parito hareḥ     Scriptures say that – Jñānis are dearer to
priyatayā vyaktiṁ yayur     Lord Kṛṣṇa than the karmīs.
jñāninas
tebhyo jñāna-vimukta-bhakti- Superior to the jñānis are the jñāna-
paramāḥ premaika-niṣṭhās vimuktas (those who are liberated by
tataḥ             jñāna)
Among them, those who take to bhakti
are the best.
Among such devotees, those who
develop love for Kṛṣṇa are greater.
tebhyas tāḥ paśu-pāla-     Better than them are the gopīs who are
paṇkaja-dṛśas tābhyo ’pi sā always dependent on Kṛṣṇa, the cowherd
rādhikā            boy.
Among all the gopīs Śrīmatī Rādhikā is
the best.
preṣṭhā tadvad iyaṁ tadīya- Just as Rādhā is dear to Kṛṣṇa, Her lake
sarasī tāṁ nāśrayet kaḥ kṛtī Rādhā-kuṇḍa is also dear to Him.
So, who wouldn’t take shelter of Rādhā-
kuṇḍa?
Hierarchy of Persons Dear to Kṛṣṇa
Progressive Levels Of Consciousness
Kṛṣṇa’s energies are threefold – spiritual (parā), marginal (jīvas) and
material (māyā). The jīvas under the spell of māyā work hard for sense
gratification (Viṣṇu Purāṇa 6.7.61, CC 2.6.154)
Vikarmīs are mad materialists who act for money and sense gratification, without the
guidance of Vedic knowledge. They engage in impious acts and degrade to miserable
births in lower species as animals and trees. All their activities of ignorance simply
serve as parābhava, their defeat. (SB 5.5.4-5)
Karmīs are those who desire material profits. They perform Vedic sacrifices, gain
pious credits and attain to the heavenly planets or the moon, and enjoy for thousands
of years. But after exhausting their pious credits, they return to the earth (BG 9.21).
Thus, they transmigrate from one body to another in different planets due to being
bound by fruitive acts. Satkarmīs are firmly established in sattva-guṇa and are
dedicated to performing virtuous deeds.
The purpose of human life is to get out of the threefold material miseries.
So, one should be eager to understand the science of the soul (ātma-tattva).
Jñānīs are knowledgeable people who understand the higher values of life and the
futility of fruitive acts that bind one to bodily sense enjoyment and oblige one to
transmigration (SB 5.5.5). A jñānī is liberated from ignorance and the three material
modes, and refrains from the blind activities of sense enjoyment of the ignorant
karmīs.
Bhaktas: A jñānī’s knowledge is impure until he comes to bhakti and directly
surrenders to Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet and worships Him. Such a great soul (mahātma) is
rare (BG 7.19). A premi-bhakta loves Kṛṣṇa deeply.
Kṛṣṇa reciprocates with us according to the way we approach Him (BG
4.11). He is so kind that He fulfills the desires of the karmīs and jñānīs, not to
speak of the bhaktas.
Vaidhi to rāga-bhakti: After performing bhakti under regulative principles,
a devotee may come to serve Kṛṣṇa in spontaneous love, following in the
footsteps of great devotees like Nārada, Sanaka and Sanātana.
The gopīs are the best of all premi-bhaktas who developed unalloyed love for Kṛṣṇa,
because they – (i) Don’t know anything other than satisfying Kṛṣṇa, (ii) Don’t expect
any return from Kṛṣṇa, and (iii) Never forget Kṛṣṇa, although Kṛṣṇa seemingly causes
them suffering by leaving Vṛndāvana for Mathurā (but actually the gopīs are always
thinking of Kṛṣṇa and this vipralambha-sevā or thinking in separation is far better
than serving Kṛṣṇa directly).
Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is the highest of all the gopīs. No one can excel Her service to
Kṛṣṇa. Even Kṛṣṇa cannot understand Her attitude, so He took Her position and
appeared as Caitanya Mahāprabhu, just to understand Her transcendental feelings.
Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa is the most exalted place, and is as dear to Kṛṣṇa as Śrī Rādhā
(Padma Purāna). So, everyone interested in Kṛṣṇa consciousness should ultimately
take shelter of Rādhā-kuṇḍa and execute bhakti there throughout their life.
Best sādhaka: Among the many varieties of sādhakas, one who performs bhakti
while residing on the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa is the best and dearest to Śrī Kṛṣṇa and is
the most fortunate person in the universe.
A pure devotee, in a spiritual body surcharged with ecstatic devotional feelings
(aprākṛtabhāva), renders loving service to the divine couple Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda,
who perform Their aṣṭakālīya-līlā.
Aṣtakālīya-līlā: Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes with His devotees in eight periods
of the day
1. Niśānta-līlā: pre-dawn pastimes
2. Prātaḥ-līlā: pastimes at dawn
3. Pūrvāhna-līlā: forenoon pastimes
4. Madhyāhna-līlā: midday pastimes
5.   Aparāhna-līlā: afternoon pastimes
6.   Sāyam-līlā: pastimes at dusk
7.   Pradoṣa-līlā: evening pastimes
8.   Rātri-līlā: midnight pastimes
Sādhakas who perform smaraṇa meditate on these pastimes.
11. GLORIES OF ŚRĪ RĀDHĀ-KUṆḌA
Residing at and Bathing in Rādhā-kuṇḍa
kṛṣṇasyoccaiḥ      Of the many objects of favor and of all the
praṇaya-vasatiḥ     lovable damsels of Vraja, Rādhārānī is the most
preyasībhyo ’pi rādhā treasured object of Kṛṣṇa’s love.
kuṇḍaṁ cāsyā       Similarly, Rādhā’s divine kuṇḍa is very dear to
munibhir abhitas     Kṛṣṇa as described by the sages.
tādṛg eva vyadhāyi
yat preṣṭhair apy    Rādhā-kuṇḍa is rarely attained even by the premi-
alam asulabhaṁ kiṁ bhaktas (like Nāṛada), what to speak of ordinary
punar bhakti-bhājāṁ devotees (practicing vaidhī-bhakti).
tat premedaṁ sakṛd If one simply bathes even once (aprākṛta-snāna)
api saraḥ snātur     in its holy waters, one’s pure love of Kṛṣṇa (like
āviṣkaroti       the gopīs) is fully aroused.
Why Is Rādhā-Kuṇḍa So Exalted?
The 10th verse described the glory of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa, and the 11th verse
intends to invoke steadfast faith of Rādhā-kuṇḍa in the hearts of sādhakas.
• Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa is the most select place for those interested in advancing their
bhakti in the wake of the girlfriends (sakhīs) and confidential serving maids
(mañjarīs) of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.
• Those who are eager to return to Goloka in their spiritual bodies (siddha-deha),
should live at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, bathe there regularly, and take shelter of the
confidential serving maids of Śrī Rādhā, and serve Her under their direction.
⚬ Even if one cannot live permanently on the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa, one should at
least take a bath in the lake as many times as possible.
• Attaining prema in this life: Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa comprises of waters of nectarean
prema. One will obtain that topmost prema by –
⚬ Transcendentally residing (aprākṛta-vāsa) on its bank aloof from all material
desires.
⚬ Transcendentally bathing (aprākṛta-snāna) in its waters, and performing deep
meditational worship (mānasa-bhajana) of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.
• Culmination of bhajana: Living at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, the pure spirit soul (aprākṛta-
jīva) should –
⚬ Externally take constant shelter of hari-nāma
⚬ Internally, in one’s spiritually perfected eternal form as a gopī, render service to
Śrīmatī Rādhikā while deeply meditating on Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā.
• Attaining Goloka: Thus, after giving up one’s material body, one will attain an
eternal spiritual body and be engaged in direct, eternal service to Śrīmatī Rādhikā.
• Conclusion: The devotee who has attained the inner perfected spiritual form as a
gopī (aprākṛta-gopī-deha) should reside, in the mood of a maidservant (pālyadāsī)
of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, on the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa in the divine land of Vraja
(aprākṛta-vraja) in the resplendent grove (kuñja) of the guru, who is situated in his
eternal form as a female friend (guru-rūpā-sakhī) of Śrī Rādhā Kṛṣṇa.
AUTHOR’S PROFILE
Gauranga Darshan Das, a disciple of His Holiness Radhanath Swami, is the Associate
Academic Dean of the Bhaktivedanta Vidyapitha Research Center at Govardhan
Ecovillage (GEV). He is a member of ISKCON Board of Examinations (BoEx) and
GEV Administrative Council. He holds a Masters degree from the Indian Institute of
Science, Bangalore. He teaches Bhagavad-gītā, Śrīmad-Bhagāvatam, Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, Vaishnava character and other scriptural courses.
Gauranga Darshan Das has written many books namely Gītā Subodhinī, Bhāgavata
Subodhinī, Caitanya Subodhinī, Upadeśāmṛta Subodhinī, Īśopaniṣad Subodhinī,
Bhakti-rasāmṛta Subodhinī, Bhāgavata Pravāha, Caitanya Pravāha, and
Disapproved but not Disowned. He has special fondness for scriptural verses and has
compiled sloka books namely Gītā Ratnamālā, Bhagavata Ratnamālā, Caitanya
Ratnamālā and Bhagavata Tattvamālā. He also runs a free monthly e-magazine
called Bhāgavata Pradīpikā and regularly writes spiritual articles that appear in Back
to Godhead International and in multiple Indian languages.
He is known for his lucid spiritual talks with captivating visuals and presentations
that give a bird’s-eye view of an entire book or section. He has delivered over 5000
hours of spiritual discourses. His sloka recitations, Nectar Verses short video series
and online courses on YouTube are adored by several devotees. He has guided many
students in their śāstric study. He also oversees the Deity worship at Govardhan
Ecovillage.
For the author’s audio and video discourses, verse recitations, and books, please visit
www.gaurangadarshan.com.
BOOKS BY THE AUTHOR
SYSTEMATIC STUDY GUIDES
Gītā Subodhinī
Bhāgavata Subodhinī Cantos 1-2
Bhāgavata Subodhinī Canto 3
Bhāgavata Subodhinī Canto 4
Bhāgavata Subodhinī Cantos 5-6
Bhāgavata Subodhinī Canto 7
Bhāgavata Subodhinī Canto 8
Bhāgavata Subodhinī Canto 9
Bhāgavata Subodhinī Canto 10
Caitanya Subodhinī Ādi-līlā
Caitanya Subodhinī Madhya-līlā I
Caitanya Subodhinī Madhya-līlā II
Caitanya Subodhinī Antya-līlā
Upadeśāmṛta Subodhinī
Īśopaniṣad Subodhinī
Bhakti-rasāmṛta Subodhinī
SELF HELP BOOKS
Bhagavata Pravaha
Caitanya Pravāha
Disapproved but not Disowned
SLOKA COMPILATIONS
Gītā Ratnamālā
Bhagavata Ratnamālā Cantos 1-6
Bhagavata Ratnamālā Cantos 7-12
Caitanya Ratnamālā
Bhagavata Tattvamālā
